I’m the Maas, bruise‑dark and restless, and I clock everything the land won’t admit. When evening slumps over the Alblasserwaard, I’m already gnawing at the basalt under Molendijk, sneaking through muskrat burrows the engineers pretend aren’t there. I taste the raw peat steam, the cow dung, the stale smoke curling off shuttered hearths. I feel the Verdronken Hof nudge my flank at Dordrecht—old side‑wheeler wheezing tar and regret—while dockhands thud beet crates onto her ribs. She shivers when that stranger pays in damp guilders and steps aboard, mildew and static trailing him into the lounge. Above, stares with one glass eye and one tired human one, muttering about rising water and locks that won’t hold. I hear him. I’m already lifting.
By the time thunder fractures the Betuwe sky, I’m done playing polite canal. I hurl rain sideways, crank the paddle wheel into brown froth, slam steam through rusted seams. Deck chairs skitter; the grand piano coughs its last chord. Then I flex—one solid wall—and pop her boiler like a tin toy. Plates buckle, rivets ping, flame and steam blur into my night. The diving bell drops, chalked names erased in my silt. The stranger bails over the rail; I carry him north, past the locks he’ll curse forever. When dawn drags its grey light across Papendrecht, I spit wreckage and hymnals onto the floodplain, keep the ship’s true epitaph buried in my tide. Officials will blame metal fatigue and pilot error, but I’ll keep grinding away, patient as rot, because rivers remember what paper forgets.

Shrewd Measures
I — Metronome
 My stomach twitches like a loose snare drum, rattling the ribs that fence my lightning‑slick heart. Every footfall hums up through the dirt as if the whole world were a speaker cone made just for me. Scent—not sight—maps the maze: beetle musk, root rot, the iron tang of worm slime. I ghost‑skate between stems, whiskers ticking like radar. A woodlouse clicks once, twice—enough. I pounce, bite, gulp in the same heartbeat, the kill already fading behind the next hunger‑beat. I am a perpetual spark, burning calories faster than frost can snuff me, and the dark soil keeps score with the heat of my passing.
II — Seismograph
 The tunnel is memory in clay: every scrape of claw, every brush of fur against loam archived in the walls. I read vibrations the way skylings read constellations—paw‑pads translating tremors into coordinates. Above, an owl’s pin‑drop wingbeat warps the ceiling; I freeze, heart throttled down to stealth. Silence swells, a pressure in the ears. When the quake of danger drifts off, I exhale humid relief that beads on my whiskers. Moving again, I draft fresh corridors, braiding fear and instinct into architecture. Down here, sound is sight, and I am cartographer and cartography at once.
III — Fuse
 Cold comes as a blunt arithmetic: degree by degree, the sum of what I’ve stored subtracts itself. I ballast the nest with shredded grass and my own twitching heat, pups tucked like living embers against my belly. Outside, snow hushes the world; inside, my pulse is the last drum at a dead rave. Sleep would be sweet, but loosening grip means extinction—so I cycle through micro‑dreams, jerking awake to count breaths that steam the thatch. When dawn finally bleeds pink through the entrance, I taste thaw on the air. Another day purchased on credit, interest compounding in marrow and will. My very being contracts to this: keep the fuse lit, whatever the cost.
IV — Barometer
 The sky’s mood presses through soil like a thumbprint on wet clay. When air weight drops, dew smells different—copper‑bright, storm‑bent. My fur spikes into antennae, logging hectopascals in gooseflesh code. I stuff my cheek‑pouches with calories as hedge against the coming downpour; hunger is an isobar I refuse to cross. A thunderhead clears its throat miles away, yet the pressure curve is already an itch beneath my scapulae. I pilot the tunnels deeper, each chamber a low‑pressure safe room. Down here, the weather can only guess where I went.
V — Oscilloscope
 Nerves fire in neon squiggles, Fraunhofer lines against the dark inside of my skull. I chirp ultrasound—pop!—and the echo punches back, a glowing waveform of root knots and pill bugs. Every blip is coordinates, every trough a void to avoid. Predators register as dirty noise, distortion that fuzzes the clean sinusoid of normal earth‑hum. I ride the signal like a DJ chasing a drop, tweaking my trajectory until the line steadies and the mix is pure.
VI — Hourglass
 Calories sift from liver to muscle to motion, sand in a glass I can’t flip. Each grain burned raises the lower bulb—life—by a micron, though the top empties faster than I can watch. I hoard beetles like time‑lords hoard seconds, yet the flow keeps slipping through the waist. My solution? Sprint harder. If the sand refuses to stay, I’ll make art of its descent: glyphs of claw‑marks, pup heartbeats, tunneling arabesques carved into the finite arc of falling time.
VII — Tuning Fork
 At dusk I sing—no bigger than a toothpick ping, but perfectly pitched. The ground answers, forks into sympathetic vibration, mapping nest‑mates and mates‑to‑be in a chorus of resonant nodes. Wave meets wave, crests align, space blooms into coordinates of belonging. In that shared frequency my pulse slows, just for a blink, and the universe filters out noise to leave one clean note: alive‑alive‑alive. When silence retakes the wick, I pocket the tone like flint and strike it against the dark, ready for the next measure.

Exec Summary - 
Weakest Link is a digital peer-to-peer micro-lending platform that turns small donor contributions into affordable working-capital loans for under-banked entrepreneurs in Kenya, South Africa, Peru, and Cuba. The service uses audited Ethereum-compatible smart contracts to automate disbursement, repayment, and public reporting, giving both donors and borrowers an experience that feels like a mainstream fintech app while preserving blockchain-level transparency. Interest payments are capped at five to nine percent, far below the twelve to nineteen percent often charged by local digital lenders, and any surplus is automatically redirected into community infrastructure such as solar panels, clean water projects, or shared Wi-Fi hubs.
The addressable market on the borrower side is expanding fast. Smartphone penetration already tops sixty-five percent in Kenya and Peru, and mobile usage is rising in South Africa despite patchy power infrastructure. Typical borrowers are micro-retailers, farmers, and gig workers earning between ninety and three hundred fifty US dollars per month, whose chief barriers are double-digit inflation, lack of collateral, and long travel times to reach brick-and-mortar banks. On the donor side, Gen Z and millennial professionals in North America and Europe increasingly favor traceable social impact over pure charity, driving an eleven percent compound annual growth in global microfinance to about two hundred fifteen billion dollars in 2024. Weakest Link fits neatly between zero-interest nonprofits such as Kiva and yield-focused DeFi pools such as Goldfinch, offering donors real-time proof of impact and borrowers fair rates.
A detailed competitive scan shows four threat categories. Brand competitors like Kiva own mindshare around philanthropic lending yet struggle to scale during downturns. Product competitors such as Tala leverage telecom data to issue short-term loans but face looming interest-rate caps. Blockchain-native pools like Goldfinch attract institutional capital but expose participants to smart-contract exploits. Finally, any retail savings vehicle or remittance service competes for the same donor wallet. Weakest Link differentiates through its audited public ledger, a central liquidity pool that lets even small donations reach many borrowers, and its charitable tax status in select jurisdictions.
Four quantified objectives anchor the first operating year: raise and allocate an initial donor liquidity pool; deploy at least eighty percent of raised funds into active loans; reach fifteen percent brand awareness in core donor markets; and keep portfolio-at-risk over thirty days below six percent. Success will be tracked by a cross-functional executive team comprising a compliance-oriented CFO, an engineering-heavy CTO division focused on Layer-2 cost reduction, and a data-driven CMO who oversees influencer collaborations and referral incentives. Break-even is projected within twenty-four to thirty-six months, funded by borrower interest margins, cooperative integration fees, and selective grants tied to infrastructure outcomes.
The marketing mix is engineered for trust and accessibility. Product design pairs a bold chain-and-dollar logo with a mobile interface that works over USSD, SMS, and WhatsApp in low-bandwidth regions. Pricing policy keeps interest below local credit ceilings, eliminates hidden fees, and rewards early repayment with gas-fee rebates and bigger future loan limits. Distribution relies on partnerships with farming cooperatives and artisan collectives, supported by multilingual field agents who handle onboarding and identity verification. Promotion budgets emphasize social-proof storytelling, user-generated video testimonials, and campaigns built around the tagline “See the chain of your impact.”
A comprehensive SWOT and PESTEL review highlights critical risk vectors. Strengths include first-mover blockchain transparency and a donation model that can deliver tax deductions to donors. Weaknesses center on dependence on voluntary contributions and the need to demystify crypto concepts for mainstream users. Opportunities lie in global internet expansion via projects like Starlink, plus rising dissatisfaction with opaque charities. Threats encompass multi-jurisdictional regulation, liquidity shocks, and cyberattacks on custody wallets. The company is countering these threats with region-specific compliance officers, a dedicated cybersecurity unit, layered insurance on the liquidity pool, and a tree-planting program to offset blockchain energy use until more efficient consensus methods mature.
Operational implementation focuses on building technical resilience and cultural alignment. Early hiring expands the information-technology team to troubleshoot smart-contract issues, while customer support staff are trained to work across cultures and bandwidth constraints. Remote-first policies, competitive benefits, and periodic field visits to borrower communities strengthen employee engagement. Continuous feedback loops with both lenders and borrowers will inform rapid product tweaks and future marketing narratives. Key performance metrics include user acquisition cost, average loan size progression, repayment velocity, and social amplification rates from donor shares.
If the team executes on these milestones, Weakest Link can redefine trust in microfinance by delivering verifiable impact at scale, easing credit frictions for thousands of small enterprises, and channeling excess capital into lasting community assets. The platform’s dual promise—financial dignity for borrowers and radical transparency for donors—positions it to become the reference standard for socially responsible digital lending in emerging markets.

Intro/Product Description ()

WEBSITE:
https://hopelesspoetic.com/weakestlink.html (sorry abt the url lol its just hosted on my personal domain)

Imagine opening an app that works like a community treasure chest: anyone can drop in a few dollars, and that money instantly turns into tiny, low-cost loans for shop-owners in Kenya, farmers in Peru, or electricians in South Africa who just need a quick boost to keep their businesses humming. Every cent you contribute is tracked on a public digital ledger, so you can see exactly where it goes and when it comes back. As borrowers repay, you earn a bit of interest, get a shareable impact badge, and watch photos and updates roll in showing new solar panels, upgraded tractors, or stocked-up market stalls made possible by your support. No banks, no hidden fees, no guessing—just clear proof that your spare change became real-world change.
The magic behind the scenes is blockchain, but you never have to touch crypto jargon to benefit. We handle the tech while you enjoy a slick, mobile-first experience: deposit with a debit card, pick projects that speak to you, and track progress in a feed that feels like social media for doing good. Surplus interest gets reinvested into local infrastructure, so your impact keeps snowballing long after the first loan is repaid. It is simple: you help a neighbor across the globe catch a financial break, they grow their income, and entire communities get stronger. Join Weakest Link and turn small dollars into big ripple effects—because when every link is sturdy, the whole chain thrives.

“If I wanted balance I wouldn’t have built an economy around goat cheese and moral ambiguity.” 
“I taught a 40-year-old lawyer how to zest a lemon while she wept over her third divorce. She tipped in bitcoin.” 
“This isn’t a bug, it’s lore. The generator is spiritually correct.” 
“Welcome to Wayward Journey. Session zero starts with a trust fall and ends with taxes.” 
“Yes, the laser halberd has reach. No, it’s not OSHA compliant.” 
“I’m not gaslighting you, I’m just adjusting your narrative in real time.” 
“We don’t playtest. We prophecy.” 
“He gave me ✨eye contact✨ like a man who *knows* the stats professor is 24 and married.” 
“Statistically speaking, someone on this floor is hiding a full Magic deck in their laundry basket.” 
“If I’m not allowed to seduce the NPC, why did you give him layered trauma and cheekbones?” 
“I coded this in a caffeine fugue at 2am while arguing about the ethics of starship cannibalism.” 
“I want a poem that reads like rot. Like cathedral mildew. Like God forgot to wipe His boots.” 
“Okay yes, it’s a bad build, but it’s a *fun* bad build. I’m doing psychic knitting and oneiric necromancy. It scales.” 
“He said ‘vibes-based economy’ like it wasn’t going to collapse in three turns.” 
“Your HTML is haunted. The `<div>` screams in lowercase.” 
“This is not a salad. This is wet leaf theatre.” 
“I got ghosted in a statistics lab. Now I haunt the regression curve.” 
“The engine is powered by unresolved feelings and indexed arrays.” 
“I’m not late. I’m narratively delayed.” 
“Every floor has a Guy. Ours owns three blenders and speaks only in Deftones lyrics.” 
“You can’t cite vibes in an ethics paper.” 
“You may *feel* like a lawful neutral bard with a moral degree, but your spreadsheet says otherwise.” 
“What do you mean the wizard school collapsed? It was accredited!” 
“I do not fear AI. I fear mid-century Dutch wallpaper.” 
“The bug *is* the feature. The randomness is the point. The crash is a sermon.” 
“You try being poetic with 3 hours of sleep and a hallway rave going on outside your door.” 
“I built this TTRPG setting so sparse you get lonely *reading* the rulebook.” 
“This isn’t poetry. This is emotional formatting with line breaks.” 
“The database is sentient and doesn’t like you.” 
“I offered him a cheese plate and he called it a love confession. So yeah. Dorm dating’s weird.” 
“The code works perfectly if you believe hard enough and ignore three warnings.” 
“I don’t need help. I need the ability to roll initiative in real life.” 
“When I say I want the vibe of windmills after war, I mean it.” 
“Bro, that’s not a romance arc. That’s a slow-motion academic collapse with feelings.” 
“It’s not bugging. It’s becoming.” 
“You think your floor has lore? Ours has a banned room and an ongoing prophecy.” 
“He wasn’t cute until he said he mained green-black midrange. Then it got biblical.” 
“I do poetry like a drunk architect—precision, collapse, beauty, rebar.” 
“Stat class is just two hours of pretending I don’t notice Aeryn fixing her eyeliner with a 0.5 mechanical pencil.” 
“I’d rather fail gracefully than debug this horror of a map generator again.” 
“All my code is commented in riddles and past regrets.”

—

Last night ate four popsicles, fell asleep on the laundry machine, and claimed it was "a controlled collapse of vibe." 
 tried to install a bidet in the shared bathroom and flooded the entire west wing. 
Someone in Room 212 is hosting “goth brunch” again. I heard Gregorian chants and smelled clove oil. 
 and got into a screaming match over how to pronounce “gif.” Neither of them were sober. 
The RA left a sticky note on our door that just said, “Chaos is not a lifestyle.” 
I submitted my final project via Google Drive link labeled “Might Work Who Knows.” 
Someone taped a QR code to the elevator. It linked to a Google Form called “Rank The Hallway Crises.” 
We held a floor meeting to discuss the unauthorized fire sword duel. It did not resolve anything. 
 wore a corset and a lab coat to stats class and called it “dichotomous aestheticism.” I think I’m in love. 
 knit a sweater with “NULL POINTER” stitched across the chest and honestly? Icon behavior. 

—

I want to write a poem that feels like forgotten bread left rising in a cracked porcelain bowl. 
My prose should rust like a neglected swing set, but sing when the wind moves through it. 
Let it smell of moss and long-drowned bells. Let the syllables rot beautifully. 
There’s a kind of silence in old libraries that tastes like burnt sugar and sawdust. 
The sun through the stained glass didn’t warm me. It judged me. 
We buried the last map with a ribbon, not a gravestone. No one speaks of what’s beyond the fjord. 
The last pilgrim went into the chapel and never came back. We hear hymns. We do not question. 
Petals bloom in the cracks of the altar. They are not native. 
The ink bled like the memory of a scream. 
He opened the ledger, expecting numbers. Found confessions instead. 
Rain doesn’t fall here. It accumulates regretfully. 
Every poem is a grave I dig with diction. 
If I whisper into the code long enough, will it dream of me? 
Let the algorithm remember my voice after I’ve gone. 

—

// javascript is just a diary of my poor life choices
// if this breaks, blame past me. or capitalism
// fun fact: this loop only fails if Mercury’s in retrograde

function cry(){
 console.error("It’s not a bug, it’s a manifestation of your hubris.");
}

const wisdom = [
 "It worked last time. What changed?",
 "I’m not fixing it. I’m documenting the failure aesthetically.",
 "The compiler didn’t crash. It mourned.",
 "My CSS is held together by vibes and deprecated properties.",
 "If it works on your machine, it’s a feature.",
 "You want semantic HTML? I want peace.",
 "Every comment in this file is a plea for help.",
 "I named the variables after my exes. That’s why they conflict.",
 "The test failed because reality is inconsistent."
];

console.log(rand(wisdom));

They said the skybox was procedurally generated, but I swear I saw the same bird glitch three times. 
The stars in Sparseworld don’t twinkle. They throb. Like they know we’re watching. 
A failed connection attempt echoes louder than gunfire in the void. 
Someone rewired the comms array to play Chopin. We haven't had silence since. 
My pilot said he wasn’t afraid to die. Then he looked out the viewport and whispered, “But I don’t want to vanish.” 
Every time the jumpdrive fails, we get a message. Not text. Not sound. Just… a knowing. 
I keep hearing an old Earth ringtone. No one on this ship is that old. 
My RPG characters are coping mechanisms with backstories. 
We don’t build walls anymore. We build thresholds and wait to see who crosses. 
He downloaded a fragment of himself into the drone. It flinches when you lie. 
Somewhere out there, a satellite is still orbiting a dead world, transmitting birthday messages to no one. 
We measure time in fuel and last words. 
The logs were corrupted, but not lost. They just chose to forget. 
You call it lag. I call it hesitation from the gods. 
One of my players cried during a combat round. Said the initiative order felt too much like real life. 
I homebrewed a mechanic where memories take psychic damage. The table went quiet. 
We thought the AI was broken. It was praying. 
You can't uncode regret. It just compiles into something else. 
He added a new rule to the system: “Every loss must be meaningful, or at least beautiful.” 
They say when a mechanic dies, their tools rust in sympathy. 

—

I held the printout like scripture, the lines jagged with desperation and ink. 
In the archive's lowest chamber, the air tastes like graphite and grief. 
Once, this language meant revolution. Now it means maintenance. 
I found a poem in the comments of a backup script. It ended with a timestamp and a name I don’t know. 
There’s a syntax to mourning. Brackets of silence. Semicolons of hesitation. 
When I left the server room, I left part of my ghost behind. She hums in binary. 
We buried our hopes in /dev/null and called it progress. 
There are bugs that don’t crash the system. They haunt it. 
You think you've fixed the memory leak, but it remembers you. 
Somewhere, my younger self is still debugging this loop. 
My dreams compile slowly, with warnings. 
We logged every failure, every overwrite, until the logs became heavier than the code itself. 
In the end, it wasn’t the engine that failed. It was belief. 
Someone once told me algorithms are just philosophies with better structure. 
I restructured the data tree, but the root still ached. 
There’s a corridor in the code that leads nowhere. I keep walking it. 
The server emits heat like sorrow. 
Every time I touch this keyboard, I reanimate a past version of myself. 
I thought I was coding a feature. I was writing a confession. 
Even the silence in this terminal is version controlled. 
I typed for hours and the only output was a single word: again. 

—

When the poets left Earth, we lost our ability to describe the stars. 
He painted his hull with ancient poetry. Said it made the vacuum less lonely. 
There’s a myth among programmers: the first line of code ever written is still running somewhere. 
I named my ship *Quiet Retort* because I never win arguments in real life. 
The console lit up with errors that weren’t in any documentation. Just “Sorry.” 
On Tuesdays, the fridge hums in iambic pentameter. 
The logs show I’ve rebooted this project 14 times. The code doesn't change. I do. 
The wiring diagram looked familiar. Then I realized—it matched the veins in my hand. 
The debugger asked me if I was okay. I don’t remember installing that feature. 
Somewhere in the repo is a branch I left behind in a panic. It still compiles. 
I call it “Machine Elegy 5.3”—the version where it finally learned to say goodbye. 
We don’t refactor code anymore. We bury it in prettier interfaces. 
If you fold the blueprint just right, it forms a cathedral. 
The ship AI keeps requesting lullabies. I didn’t teach it that. 
The emergency override code is a palindrome. Of course it is. 
She built a keyboard out of bone and regret. The spacebar stuck like memory. 
All the players are asleep, but the dice keep rolling. 
I drew a map of the known galaxy. It only labeled absences. 
This isn’t a world. It’s a waiting room for gods. 
The patch notes just read: “We made it worse, but prettier.”

—

Final commit: 
`// it never really worked, but it was beautiful.` 

Target Audience ()
Who is the consumer for the product? 
General environment, 
What are their needs 
Environmental factors that affect who they are 
How they consume products/services. 
Demographics
Geographic location
Psychographic profiles
Values/lifestyles
*Heavy and Light Users*
How does the product answer the customers needs 

The Weakest Link aims to aid those in environments where the centralized banks and banking is hard to acquire. Additionally areas with more economic downturn and higher inflation. Areas such as Kenya, South Africa, Cuba, and Peru are good focus areas for the company as small business owners and entrepreneurs in these areas face similar issues. Farmers and entrepreneurs for unique small businesses face volatile and seasonal markets with median monthly income ranges. These borrowers would have the goal of growing their business to support their families and the people around them. They might want to buy certain tools to grow their business or start one up. Using The Weakest Link is accessible via the phone so borrowers who have access to the internet are who the company would target in each of these areas.
 On the other side, our company focuses on lenders for supplying the money for the borrowers. Weakest Link lenders are individuals who use their money to support global social impact rather than to seek financial returns. They typically come from developed countries and are drawn to the platform’s transparency and personal borrower stories. Many are motivated by a desire to help underserved communities gain access to credit and improve their economic standing. The lender base includes a mix of younger generations like Millennials and Gen Z, as well as older donors who are deeply committed to charitable giving. They are comfortable with digital platforms, often lend small amounts starting at $25, and value the ability to track exactly how their contribution is used and the outcomes it supports.

Heavy Users:
Low income workers in financially downtrodden areas such as … 
Owners of small businesses such as small markets selling seasonal goods or unique products, farms or agricultural owners with seasonal sales.
Young Investors with strong senses of giving back to others and wanting to see their progress/impact of their investments with sturdy returns

Light Users:
Owners of medium sized businesses who need loans to grow
Older investors who have some desire to give back but might not compare
Situation Analysis ()
Research and describe how global/situational conditions have created a need for this product
Current Offering and Strategy
Weakest Link positions itself at the intersection of micro-credit and decentralized finance. The core value proposition is a global lending pool where donors earn modest yields while borrowers in Cuba, South Africa, Peru, and Kenya receive affordable, non-predatory loans. Smart contracts on Ethereum (or an EVM-compatible sidechain) automate disbursement and repayment, publish an immutable audit trail, and redirect surplus interest into local infrastructure projects and a peer-to-peer goods marketplace. The strategy solves two pain points simultaneously: donor distrust in opaque charities and borrower exclusion from traditional banks.
Internal Environment
Operationally the venture already controls three scarce resources: a functioning lending contract audited to industry standards, partnerships with local co-ops that vet borrowers, and a modest treasury of stablecoins to seed liquidity. Its talent bench skews toward engineers and community managers, giving it strong product velocity but thinner regulatory and compliance expertise. Near-term risks include Ethereum gas costs that spike during network congestion, the learning curve of onboarding non-technical borrowers, and the need for a larger liquidity buffer to absorb regional currency shocks. Looking ahead, Layer-2 roll-outs and account-abstraction wallets can tame gas fees, though they demand continuous engineering effort to keep contracts up to date.
Customer Environment
Borrowers are micro-retailers, farmers, and gig-workers whose median monthly income ranges from roughly USD 90 in rural Cuba to USD 350 in peri-urban Kenya. Their chief obstacles are double-digit inflation, sparse collateral, and travel distances to brick-and-mortar banks. Smartphone penetration now exceeds sixty-five percent in Kenya and Peru and continues to climb in South Africa, making mobile wallets a viable delivery channel. Donors on the other side skew millennial and Gen Z, value traceability, and prefer impact investing over pure charity. The platform’s clear on-chain metrics and a social-media style feed of funded projects map neatly onto these preferences.
External Environment
Economic conditions differ sharply across the focus countries. Kenya is projected to expand 5.6 percent in 2025, providing rising disposable income and a supportive fintech culture. Peru’s economy is set to grow about 3.2 percent but faces increased policy uncertainty which can dampen loan demand. South Africa wrestles with unemployment above thirty-two percent, a reality that heightens credit risk while also enlarging the addressable borrower pool. Cuba remains the most fragile market, fighting inflation near twenty-five percent and sporadic access to foreign exchange. These macro trends shape borrowers’ repayment capacity and dictate how low the platform can push interest rates without eroding its sustainability.
Industry economics show microfinance expanding at an eleven percent CAGR, hitting roughly USD 215 billion in 2024. Digital rails are increasingly favored because they slash distribution costs, but the downturn in African fintech funding—down forty-five percent year-on-year—signals tougher capital markets and a higher bar for proof of traction. Raw-material inputs are minimal; the real cost drivers are validator fees, cybersecurity audits, local field-agent stipends, and capital reserves to manage currency volatility.
Regulatory and political issues loom large. Kenya’s Central Bank now licenses digital credit providers under tighter consumer-protection rules, raising compliance overhead yet also conferring legitimacy. South Africa will enforce the FATF “Travel Rule” on crypto transfers by April 2025, mandating robust KYC data sharing. In Cuba, recent OFAC amendments marginally loosen U.S. sanctions, opening a cautious path for cross-border stablecoin flows but still requiring a Central Bank license. Peru maintains a deliberately light fintech framework with no specific fee caps, allowing flexible pricing models.
Competitive Landscape
Brand competitors targeting the same donor psychology include Kiva, which has surpassed USD 2 billion in cumulative loans and lends at zero interest, relying on donations to cover costs. Product competitors like Tala issue short-term unsecured credit via mobile apps, have served ten million customers, and deployed USD 6 billion, demonstrating scale and embedded data science for risk scoring. Blockchain-native competitors such as Goldfinch pool over one thousand institutional private-credit loans with yields of ten to twelve percent. Generic competitors are any charity, ESG fund, or retail savings product vying for the same philanthropic or investment dollars. Total-budget competitors include traditional remittance channels that relatives might otherwise use to support family members.
Kiva’s nonprofit model keeps interest at zero but depends on donor goodwill, limiting growth during economic downturns. Tala monetizes via origination and late fees, faces new CFPB-style interest caps in Kenya, but enjoys deep distribution partnerships with telecoms. Goldfinch targets institutional lenders, not end-borrowers, and carries smart-contract risk; nevertheless, its marketing spend dwarfs Weakest Link’s thanks to VC backing.
Societal and Demographic Shifts
Under-forty demographics dominate the populations of Kenya and Peru, and mobile-first behavior is standard. Cash usage is eroding in South Africa as regulatory clarity around crypto assets improves. Globally, donors display rising skepticism toward opaque charities and a preference for transparent, measurable impact backed by immutable data. These shifts validate the platform’s blockchain ledger as a trust engine while raising expectations for real-time reporting.
Impact on the Marketing Mix
Product features must keep evolving. Inflation-hedged stablecoins and optional local-currency swaps will become essential in Cuba and South Africa. Transparent yield dashboards satisfy donor value perceptions, while a gamified credit-score builder resonates with borrowers. Pricing must remain below local digital lenders yet well above break-even after gas fees and default provisions. Distribution hinges on lightweight mobile interfaces, USSD options for low-bandwidth zones, and local agent networks for cash-in and cash-out. Promotion should foreground audited impact metrics and donor stories delivered via influencer partnerships and community DAOs to tap viral trust networks. Finally, people strategy requires bilingual customer-success teams versed in both crypto onboarding and local credit counseling, plus compliance officers who track multi-jurisdictional AML rules.
Outlook
If Weakest Link leans into Layer-2 cost reductions, secures regional regulatory endorsements, and markets its surplus-to-infrastructure flywheel aggressively, it can occupy a distinct niche between zero-interest philanthropy and high-yield DeFi credit pools. Success will depend on matching the fluid macroeconomics of four very different countries with a unified yet adaptable product stack that donors recognize as both ethically grounded and financially sound.

SWOT Analysis - 
Strengths
Weakest Link’s greatest asset is its reliance on blockchain. It is the first microfinance company to do this, which protects it from outside interests by a third party investor or owner who may seek to extract profit from the company. This asset also provides prospective lenders with added security when making payments to the lending pool. Thanks to the company’s status as a charitable organization, lenders are incentivized to donate with perks such as tax benefits. The use of a lending pool to provide support to borrowers is another unique point which adds structure to the service, compared with contemporaries like Kiva. Our entry with a new, decentralized approach has the potential to remake the image of microfinance and of crowdsourcing, potentially jumpstarting the market and positioning our product as a leader. There is a strong need for financial support for underbanked populations, and Weakest Link has the potential to help in ways that benefit everyone.
Weaknesses
Weakest Link will rely on donations from lenders who are contributing to a centralized lending pool. This source of funds is independent of major investors, which frees the company from reliance on third party interests, however is less stable by comparison. Effective marketing is key to ensure new lenders are attracted to the service, and are then maintained through a positive user experience and benefits. Some people might be wary of lending their money to a service like this, be it that they don’t understand how it is used, or that they don’t understand the blockchain. Furthermore, there are stigmas against charity which must be overcome in order to reach a broad population (candid.org).
Opportunities
Weakest Link stands out from its contemporaries by its use of blockchain to safeguard transactions, and a centralized lending pool to provide structure to its loan system. This is a new approach to microfinance which can expand the market. This product comes at a time where internet access is being spread farther around the globe into remote and rural areas, thanks to companies like Starlink, which creates an opportunity for this market to grow as a larger pool of underbanked communities are able to seek out lending services online (Sciencedirect.com).
Threats
Operating a financial services institution, even on the level of microfinance, requires adhering to regulations which vary by country. If Weakest Link is to expand its reach globally, it will have to fine tune its service to comply with these regulations, making for complex programming and design challenges (margcompusoft). In addition, its operations and communications with the public must be unimpeachable. Kiva, one of Weakest Link’s contemporaries, has struggled with its reputation due to shady moves to hide interest rate information and reduce transparency about executive compensation, leading to concerns that their mission had shifted from creating change to creating revenue (technologyreview). Such a reputation shift could be catastrophic.
PESTEL Analysis - 
Political
The state of global commerce will affect the ease with which we can conduct our business overseas. If global relations deteriorate to the point where international internet access is limited, our company may have to move its operations elsewhere.
Economic
The state of the global economy has a major impact on our lending pool, as lenders must have disposable income to be able to donate to our service. We can target marketing toward growing economies, such as India, where people with newly-made fortunes may be more willing to give back and help those in need (IMF).
Social
We have the challenge of distinguishing ourselves to both the lender and borrower pools of users. Gaining a core base of lenders in a strong economy will provide a reliable base of funds, from which word of mouth can complement our marketing to drive growth. On the other side, we will need to make potential borrowers aware of the benefits of our service, especially in areas that are only just now gaining reliable internet access.
Technological
Our product relies on a digital interface for users on both ends: lending and borrowing. This interface must be easy to use in order to maintain frequent use from both areas, and it must be visually appealing and accessible enough to remain comfortable for use relative to other websites. Furthermore, our reliance on blockchain helps us to be transparent with payments and secure for lenders.
Environmental
The blockchain technology our service is based on is known for its high energy consumption. This makes sustainability a challenge while the world transitions to renewable resources. (pre-sustainability.com) As such, our environmental performance relies on technological advancements in the world. Until then, we will plant trees using our interest funds to offset the carbon emissions.
Legal
Our microfinance business will have to comply with any local regulations on financial institutions that apply in countries where we do business (margcompusoft). In addition, our website will have to comply with data collection and other privacy laws, which also vary on a local level.

Major Competitors ()

Kiva (https://www.kiva.org/about):
A non profit organization aimed at expanding financial access to underserved communities with limited banking access. Kiva emphasizes transparency and impact, providing detailed information about borrowers and loan purposes to foster trust with their customers. Lenders can individually give as little as $25 to small businesses and entrepreneurs of their choosing all over the world. Kiva partners with multiple microfinance institutions so that borrowers can apply for loans through these local partners. These lenders earn 0% interest and all of the money goes to the borrowers with the option to re-lend the funds that were repaid into other borrowers. Kiva has loaned $2.8 billion to 5.2 million borrowers over 80 countries and a repayment rate of 96.3%

Lendio (https://www.lendio.com/):
A U.S. based online marketplace for small business owners to connect with potential lenders for their businesses. Ledio, based on the information in an application submitted by the borrower, finds the most suitable lenders and loan options from its broad network. They offer SBA loans, business lines of credit, equipment financing, and merchant cash advances as well as other types of loan. Lendio has developed a streamlined application process as well as personalizing their funding for each borrower. Lendio has served over 400,000 small businesses and provided more than $15 billion in loans.

Bluevine (https://www.bluevine.com/):
Bluevine is a FinTech Company offering tailored banking solutions to small businesses and their owners. They offer business checking accounts, lines of credit, and business credit cards with added benefits of no monthly fees, different lines of credit, and competitive interest rates. Bluevine earns their revenue from the interest on loans and lines of credit and has a strong emphasis on customer centered features and digital solutions which keep them competitive with traditional banks. They are insured by their banking partner, Coastal Community Bank. They have helped serve 500,000 businesses and been able to supply over $14 billion in loans.

Accion (https://www.accion.org/):
Accion is a nonprofit organization aiming for financial inclusion. They often partner with financial service providers, fintech companies, and other organizations to develop digital financial tools for underdeveloped and served areas to improve the lives of those small business owners and entrepreneurs. Accion provides training and resources to partner organizations to develop these tools. They have been able to help more than 440 million people in more than 75 countries. They’re revenue strategy is through donations, grants, and those partnerships

Goals and Objectives ()
Main Goal : Build a transparent, accessible lending platform that empowered rural micro-entrepreneurs while providing measurable impact for global donors
.
Objective 1: Establish donor liquidity and fund lending pool (12 months) CMO will lead donor acquisitions, CFO will manage fund allocation and donor tracking

Objective 2: Deploy at least 80% of raised funds into active loans (12 months) Borrower Ops ensure loan distribution, CFO tracks fund utilization and surplus management 

Objective 3: Achieve brand awareness of 15% among target donor markets (12 months) Handled by Digital Marketing, Influencer Relations, and Analytics under CMO

Objective 4: Maintain borrower repayment risk (PAR30) below 6% (monitored quarterly) This will be handled by Risk Management, Repayment monitoring and cooperative partners coordination

Marketing Mix Strategy ()

Consumer strategy

 Weakest Link targets two key user groups. The first are the donors, tech-literate Gen Zs and Millenials in North America and Europe who are motivated by transparency, digital innovation, and measurable social impact. These individuals are frequently online, follow ethical finance influencers and are more likely to support platforms offering visible and trackable outcomes. Our second group are the borrowers, rural micro-entrepreneurs in Kenya, South Africa, Peru, and Cuba. Many are women working in agriculture, food and artisan sectors. They seek reliable, affordable capital to grow their businesses and avoid predatory lenders. Both groups value ease of use, trust and community empowerment. Donors act as both funders and brand advocates. Borrowers represent recurring users with high potential for retention. 

Product marketing strategy

 Weakest Link’s product strategy emphasizes both function and form. The brand name, Weakest Link, highlights our mission to strengthen vulnerable committed through transparent lending. Our logo features a bold yellow dollar sign encircled by a metal chain, with a singular green link standing out. This green link represents hope, change and connection, positioning our platform as a bridge between capital and impact. Our imagery reflects blockchain technology, financial empowerment, and resilience in underserved communities. 
 
At its core, Weakest Link enables blockchain-based lending with full transaction visibility, supported by smart contracts that automate loan creation, repayment and reinvestment. Donors receive real time dashboards tracking where and how their contributions are used, while borrowers benefit from an incentive system that unlocks larger loan amounts and voting rights on surplus reinvestment projects. To ensure accessibility, the platform supports mobile-friendly interactions via SMS and WhatsApp, supplemented by multilingual customer service and field agent assistance through local cooperatives. What sets Weakest Link apart is its unique fusion of crowdfunding transparency, microfinance reach and blockchain-level auditability.

Pricing strategy

 Weakest Link’s pricing strategy is designed to challenge predatory lending models while still remaining financially sustainable. Borrowers will pay interest rates between 5% and 9% annually, depending on local risk factors. A much more affordable rate compared to the 12% to 19% APRs charged by private lenders (Kenya Cost of Credit, n.d.). There will be no hidden fees, or late penalty traps that borrowers could fall into. Borrowers who repay early will receive gas fee rebates and gain access to higher loan tiers. Donors receive no financial return; instead, surplus interest is reinvested into community infrastructure projects such as solar power, clean water or Wi-Fi. In eligible countries, donor contributions may qualify for tax deductions (Lawsky, n.d.), adding financial benefit to social impact. Our financial model targets platform break-even within two or three years, supported by donor growth and borrower demand ​​(CGAP & MIX, 2010).

Supply chain strategy

 Accessibility and simplicity are key factors in Weakest Link’s distribution strategy. For borrowers, we’ll partner with local cooperatives, farming associates and artisan collectives to facilitate onboarding and support. We’ll hold info sessions and publish how-to videos making usage as accessible as possible. In more rural areas with limited internet access, borrowers will be able to utilize straightforward USSD, SMS and WhatApp systems to connect with local field agents available for in-person support. Donors engage through access to a website along with a mobile optimized platform where they can contribute funds, track outcomes, and receive automated repayment updates via smart contracts. To manage logistical risks, we implement borrower tiers to limit exposure during initial loans, and regional compliance officers handle ID verification and licensing (Anti-Financial Crime & Regulatory Compliance, n.d.). Field agents report loan outcomes in real time, ensuring accountability and support. 
 
Integrated marketing communication strategy

The integrated marketing communication (IMC) strategy focuses on trust building and early platform adoption. Our objectives include increasing brand awareness to 15% in pilot donor markets within 12 months and growing both donor and borrower referrals. About 15% of our Year 1 donor acquisition budget is allocated to promotional efforts. Consumer-facing promotions include the Impact Multiplier referral program, donation matching campaigns during launch, and monthly email newsletters featuring borrower success stories. Our advertising strategy includes paid campaigns on Facebook, Instagram, X and LinkedIn, as well as user generated video testimonials and collabs with ethical finance influencers (Insa, 2023). Public relation efforts aim for placements in fintech, blockchain, and global development outlets. Messaging will center on themes such as “See the chain of your impact,” “Your dollar doesn't disappear, it multiplies,” “Blockchain transparency. Real world change.” On the trade side, we offer onboarding bonuses and co-branded marketing materials for cooperatives, along with WhatsApp ready flyers and milestone incentives to drive field engagement. 
 
Our marketing mix strategy positions Weakest Link as an innovative and community first platform, differentiated by transparent, operational integrity, and a dual sided value proposition.

Marketing Implementation
Organization design, leadership structure - example below ()

Internal marketing strategy (incentives, training, benefits)

A strong internal marketing strategy is crucial to ensure our vision is carried out across the company, with participation from all employees.

Incentives

Training

Given the unique segment this service carves out, employees must be trained in its operation in a manner which focuses on what differentiates it. They’ll need to be given a strong understanding of the blockchain system and how to interface with it. This can be executed through online and in-person training courses. Employees should also be educated in practices for conducting exchanges across cultures and socioeconomic backgrounds, which can be facilitated through required reading material and engaging collaborative learning sessions.

Benefits

Because Weakest Link is a digital service, we can provide employees with an attractive hybrid work structure where they have the flexibility to work certain hours remotely. We believe we will attract a workforce who is charity-oriented and will take great pride in the genuine good that our service provides. This shared vision will foster a family-like culture. The company can sponsor in-person trips to underbanked regions where employees can interact directly with lenders to make sure the benefit of our service is being realized. Such trips will give employees a more tangible tie to their work, avoiding the risk of a disconnect created through digital separation from the users, allowing them to take further pride in it.

Evaluation and Controls (input, process, output)
Inputs

Before implementation takes place, the company must grow its information technology workforce in order to respond to teething issues with the service. Such issues are expected from a new online service, especially one which adopts new technology like blockchain. These information technology specialists will help to iron out these issues early. In addition, customer support that tailors to each region of operation must be developed to respond to specialized needs from different customers in different cultures.

Process

It is crucial that a constant dialogue be maintained with lenders and borrowers. If either of them feel there is an issue with the service that puts them at a disadvantage, such as the interest rates or centralized lending pool, we must be able to respond quickly to make sure our mission of providing transparent, secure financial assistance to underbanked populations is being upheld. Early success of the service has the potential to strengthen our future marketing further, so collecting this data from users to refine it will help to boost our reputation in support of this hope. In addition to being a company recognized for doing genuine good, we want to be recognized as a company that listens to its users.

Output

As implementation is underway, we’ll be monitoring the number of new and returning users, both in the lending and borrowing sides of the site, making sure to seek their feedback as mentioned previously. We will hope to share success stories from borrowers, further helping to inspire commitment in employees. In addition, we’ll keep constant watch over the lending pool to make sure it grows steadily. Controlling how these funds get executed will allow us to make sure the funds don’t drop below a certain point.

Risks
Low public interest
Ensuring our marketing is targeting the correct demographic in strong economies is crucial to ensure early success. If we don’t execute the marketing strategy correctly, we could see low public interest that makes initial fundraising difficult, if not impossible, harming our chances of success. Marketing specialists will be on hand to help refine our strategy as needed to avoid this issue.
Disputes with lenders and borrowers
One of the greatest concerns is dealing with anxiety in the event that lenders are unable to get money paid back, and that borrowers feel pressure to pay back their loans. This stress can harm the reputation of our service, so we’ll have to act internally to help prevent these situations from arising. We can implement a goal-based rewards program for borrowers who pay back their loans within certain timeframes, and a safety system to make sure lenders get at least their original sum paid back.
Hack
While blockchain is known for its security in protecting payment exchanges, there is always the possibility that our pool of funds will prove attractive enough to inspire cybercriminals to attempt to hack into our system. We will need to be prepared for this by practicing unimpeachable cybersecurity tactics and keeping a team of cybersecurity experts on hand to ensure our protection is up to date.
Global political environment
As is the same for all companies with international operations, we are impacted by any political moves that impact our ability to do business with our target populations, as well as our ability to do business internationally in general. We must remain aware of changes to the global political landscape, adapting to comply with all necessary regulations to ensure we can continue operating on our desired scale.
New competitors
There is the possibility that following our initial success, new competitors will try to enter the market. Blockchain can be freely adopted, so we’ll need to differentiate ourselves through our relations with our users. Because we’ll have a head start in this market from future competitors, the data we collect from users early on will give us a strong advantage. With our on-hand IT team, we’ll be able to adapt the service to make sure it can suit the needs of our users.
Make sure customer support, IT, cybersecurity, are included in leadership structure

Workshop Notes
Rhythmic, like a tale being told
Easy to understand somehow
Epigraph is cool: based
Hope as an underlying theme - hope and illusion
Definitely fun to read aloud
Didn’t overwhelm with worldbuilding
The storyteller is a silly lil guy
Does the enemy need to be talked about more
More clues in intro paragraph mayhaps

Lay Softly My Soul Unto The Earth
By 
I shall not yield to death in shameful plight;
But strive to forge a deed that all might praise.
Reveal the gloom; unmask the mortal night,
Ten thousand wicked devils march and sway
Here now the creeping dark knocks at my door,
Content with siege engine and trebuchet
For all who roam upon this fragile floor
Must stand, unbowed, and strive with all their might.
Let him who dares seize glory ere he falls;
Nor let the sands of fate drift on in vain;
By steadfast will, secure the laurel crown,
And carve a lasting name where hopes remain.
Thus shall my voice defy the hush of death,
And sing of hope triumphant with each breath.
, CV 1185

Hearken, dear sirs and gentlefolk, unto this vow that did flare in Redpeak’s most dire hour. For uncounted winters have I roamed these crooked roads, my tattered cloak flapping in the wind like the wings of some ragged crow. Possessed of naught but a battered lyre’s memory in my soul, I be a humble minstrel well acquainted with frayed boots and half-eaten crumbs. Yet illusions, dear friends, I have in abundance. Illusions as ephemeral as evening mist, illusions that flicker and dance before despair like a lone candle in an endless tunnel.
Attend me now, that I might weave this tapestry of words. Upon a craggy outcrop stands Redpeak - its crooked spires thrust into the heavens as though in challenge to the wind. Ancient banners, frayed as an old beggar’s cloak, once fluttered from those heights. Look ye well upon the leaning turrets, their gargoyles worn faceless by the march of years. Down below, a warren of alleys twist and coil, strewn with uneven stones that glisten in perpetual damp. A thousand and one stairways - some carved centuries ago, some newly hewn - ascend and descend in labyrinthine chaos, leading the curious astray. Hither and yon, vendors proclaim with hoarse voices the grand illusions of their wares - “Witness this helm, said to be forged from a comet’s heart!” - though in truth, the steel is as terrestrial as the mud beneath thy feet. Yet illusions do hold the city’s weary hearts, for illusions lend color to the bleak tapestry of a place battered by ill luck.
In that realm of dimly lit corners and high, wind-whipped parapets, came . A soldier of repute, for so the whispers ran, with scars like a map of hidden roads crisscrossing his flesh. His battered cuirass, chipped and scored by countless assaults, seemed to reflect not the bright promise of polished steel but the stubborn will of a man who dares stand upright though the world tilts. Rumor spake of twisted horrors advancing from the east, nightmares clad in flesh that was once human - nay, monstrous shapes that shambled under some unholy impetus. The folk of Redpeak, half-choking on their own dread, shuttered windows that had seen centuries of dawn. Children, wide-eyed as fawns, crept beneath broken tables or clutched tarnished amulets. The city’s illusions, of star-forged swords and endless bounty, trembled in the face of a foe whose name no tongue wished to utter.
On the eve preceding the final stand, inscribed a bold missive: “Let me not yield to death in shameful plight...” Quoth he in a trembling yet resolute script, as though the parchment might be the last vessel of his soul. By trick of fortune, that scroll passed to my unworthy hands. A wretch I was, cowering near his tent in quest of war-stories to spin into gold with my cunning tongue. No sooner had I pricked mine ear at the tent’s canvas flap than a hulking guard seized me, dragging me out as a cat might a scrawny rat. Next I knew, I was plunged into a cask of brine and salted fish - verily an indignity that reeked for many a day. Yet, with a dry and weary humor, the general spared me from worse punishment. A faint quirk of his lip betrayed mild amusement at my plight, and ere I could properly gather my senses, he thrust the parchment into my shaking grip. “Bear these words,” quoth he, “and carry them into memory if we perish.”
Thus burdened with a vow mightier than my usual trifles, I wandered Redpeak’s serpentine lanes that night. Clouds hung low, darkening the moon’s pale face. Shattered lanterns flickered in shallow alcoves, casting unsteady shadows upon chipped walls scrawled with half-faded runes. A hush blanketed the city, heavy and damp, as though every last voice had crouched beneath a table and held its breath. Beneath a leaning arch, I beheld a wizened matron kneeling in the gutter, gathering spilt grain kernels into a torn apron. Farther on, near a boarded house, a ragged dog pawed at the door, whining for a master who might never return. In that weighted silence, the smell of burning pitch and old regrets mingled in the thin mountain air.
With dawn’s ghostly approach, the defenders amassed atop the walls - those crumbling ramparts overlooking a yawning precipice. Worn faces, hollow from sleepless nights, glowed in the sickly half-light. strode among them, a living emblem of battered resolve, his gauntleted hand resting on the pommel of a sword marred by many campaigns. Some in the throng were bearded veterans with eyes like flint; others were mere apprentices, cheeks still ruddy with youth, anxiously gripping spear-shafts. My vantage lay behind the merlons of a broken tower, my heart drumming a frantic beat in my chest. Beneath me, the yawning drop promised a swift end if I grew careless. A cold wind snaked through the stones, stirring tatters of old banners. Then, from the distant gloom, came a horn’s low moan - a note that shivered through the soul like a raven’s cry at dusk.
So commenced the onslaught. First came the hammering at the gates - dull, concussive blows that set my teeth on edge. Twixt each strike, I heard the ragged breath of men upon the wall, the faint whimper of a youth trembling behind a shield. At last the timbers cracked, screaming in protest. A seething mass of shapes drove forward, black forms writhing as though a single monstrous body. Arrows whistled from the ramparts, a deadly rain that struck some beasts down, though many more lumbered on. Beneath the clarion calls of the defenders rose a swirl of savage roars, as though the very pit of nightmares had spewed forth. My mouth turned dry as old parchment.
By midday’s halflight - so feeble was the sun behind a pall of storm-clouds - the battered gates threatened collapse. signaled a retreat. “To the temple courtyard!” came the cry, echoed by every hoarse voice. Thus the defenders spilled into a great stone square once crowned by marble pillars carved with images of ancient victories. Alas, time had gnawed at those carvings until heroic visages were but faint outlines, and now the very courtyard itself lay strewn with rubble. Soldiers, artisans, and farmers alike pressed themselves behind broken walls, overturned carts, and the shattered stumps of statuary. Dust-laden motes drifted in the stale air. A hush fell - then the gates gave way entirely, and the foe flooded in.
Chaos unspooled in jagged ribbons. Sword met claw, spear bit met rabid maw. I glimpsed a woman in smith’s apron braining a twisted horror with a hammer blow, while a trembling youth, tears streaming, jabbed a broken halberd again and again into some slavering fiend. The stench of blood thickened the air, mingling with acrid smoke from braziers overturned in the fray. Still perched upon a fallen obelisk, I strove to note it all, my trembling quill set to memory, for I had neither skill nor nerve to join the clash.
Somewhere in that madness, ’s voice rang like a war horn.
“Stand, ye who cherish the morn! Let not the blackness devour what we hold dear!”
His blade, chipped and battered, blazed with each desperate strike. The defenders, rallying, locked shields and found fresh resolve. Yet the foe pushed ceaselessly, feeding upon fear. Stone pillars cracked further, dust raining down in choking billows. I expected each breath to be my last, so fiercely did my heart pound.
But as the sun drooped low behind grim clouds, the monstrous horde began to flag. Their onslaught lost cohesion, pressed back by the last shred of mortal bravery. With a series of shuddering roars, the black legion slunk away, leaving behind a courtyard strewn with the silent forms of friend and foe alike. Tattered banners lay in pools of gore. A hush spread, and in that hush I heard the ragged weeping of the living, the final sigh of the dying.
From behind a toppled column slid a small boy. Soot clung to his cheeks, and he clasped a wooden flute dear as though it were a relic of some beloved saint. He trod lightly past the remnants of a fallen statue - an arm, still pointing valiantly upward - until he reached , who knelt, armor punctured, blood trickling forth with each labored breath. The child raised a dented flask, offering water. A faint flicker of gratitude lit the general’s eyes. In that tiny exchange of compassion, the savage day softened.
So Redpeak yet endured. Some called it a miracle - others, the lingering cruelty of fate. The city lay half in ruin, rooftops caved where catapult stones had fallen, or where fires had licked unopposed for hours. Streets stank of smoke, death, and sorrow. Yet amid the desolation, folk gathered their dead with gentle reverence, an odd hush guiding their steps. I saw a mother cradle her child’s lifeless form while an old farmer rested his forehead against his battered shovel, tears cutting channels through the dust on his face. From these battered hearts, I sensed a spark still lived - a spark of defiance that refused to be quenched.
In time, I made my way to the keep, where watchers in dented helms guarded a door half-hanging from splintered hinges. Within, upon a makeshift bed of straw and soiled linens, lay propped against pillows, each breath measured like a blacksmith’s bellows nearing exhaustion. His eyes found mine, and a rasping chuckle emerged. “Thou again, fish-stenched vagabond?” quoth he, the mirth in his voice unbroken by pain.
I bowed in mock grandeur. “Thy vow, O general, is now the city’s shield. Illusions indeed, but illusions that hold men upright against the gloom.”
A battered sigh escaped him. “If illusions keep them from despair, let us call them truths.” Gently he touched the bandage round his shoulder. “I scarce believed I would see another morn. Perhaps we are all illusions, held together by faith alone.”
Thereafter, I wandered Redpeak’s battered courtyards, spinning the tale of that dreadful siege. Oft did I add comedic touches - my ill-fated tumble into fish brine, for instance - to stir some spark of laughter in the gloom. Children ringed me at dusk, wide eyes brimming with tearful awe. Soldiers with limbs in splints would nod wearily, as though my words were a salve upon their wounds. Meanwhile, old wives doled out broth from blackened pots, feeding those who had lost all. One might see, in each humble act, the forging of new illusions: illusions that tomorrow might yet dawn in kinder hues.
Gradually, Redpeak stitched itself from near-ruin. Women patched holes in sagging roofs using tar and scraps of sailcloth. Men hammered and bent broken swords into nails, reinforcing the gate with stubborn pride. Where plumes of smoke had scarred the sky, faint glimmers of sunlight now broke through. In the hollows of charred alleyways, cats prowled anew, searching for morsels of leftover stew. Such trifling sights might seem mundane, yet to the folk who had stared into the maw of annihilation, each meager sign of life was a benediction.
Eventually, my boots itched for the open road. On a dawn brightened by the faint glister of dew, I gathered my few belongings - chiefly a ragged satchel stuffed with scribbled notes - and, with a final glance to the keep’s tower, took my leave. From that high vantage, I saw watching me, leaning on a crutch. Our gazes met, wordless yet profound: we had witnessed how illusions could spark a city’s survival. Then I slipped through the battered gates, stepping onto a path that wound between stunted trees and rocky outcrops. Each breeze carried the tang of pine mingled with old smoke, a reminder that Redpeak was never far behind.
At every inn or roadside hearth thereafter, I shared the chronicle of Redpeak’s stand. Rubbing my hands over a cup of mulled wine, I would conjure the roars of the foe, the clangor of steel, the child’s flute, the battered general. Eyes would widen, hearts would pound in shared terror. But always, I ended with the vow: “Let me not then die ingloriously and without a struggle...” Then came the hush - that sweet hush when illusions become a spark lighting human courage. Though the war roiled onward in far-flung fields, though horrors doubtless lurked beyond the horizon, I carried the vow in me like a flame in a lantern, guarded against the wind.
So may Redpeak endure, perched upon its cliff, illusions woven anew from small generosities. An orphan sharing a crust of bread, a blacksmith forging rivets from broken helm plates - these tiny deeds might not level armies, yet they keep hearts from sinking into the black mire of despair. Thus do illusions bridge the gulf that yawns between fear and hope.
Shouldst thou wander near Redpeak’s battered walls, recall the vow of General . Picture a child offering water to a warrior bowed by blood and exhaustion. Let it stir in thee the knowledge that illusions, shaped by humility and love, can outshine a thousand terrors. For each mortal life brims with hidden tales, each soul a tapestry of heartbreak and bravery. Illusions, indeed - yet illusions that harness the intangible might of faith, forging from them the very pillars that hold the darkness at bay.
Hence ends my telling. If thou findest me upon the king’s road, dust-laden cloak clinging to my shoulders and pockets clinking with battered dice, pray share with me a morsel of bread or a seat by the fire. For illusions, though wondrous, are best tended in the warmth of fellowship. Think on Redpeak, battered but unbroken, and let its vow echo in thine own heart when the creeping dark comes nigh. Who knows, dear friend, what single day of defiance might achieve? Let us gather illusions as we gather kindling in winter - so that our spirits burn ever bright against the beckoning night. 
To you I bid a most fond farewell. Cheers be unto you! For only in illusions must I speak.

I opened my eyes to gray shadows dancing lazily across the cracked ceiling, cast by curtains worn thin by age and neglect. A dull hum lingered from the corner, the air conditioning unit rattling softly, as if lamenting its futile effort. The sheets beneath me scraped gently against my skin, burlap masquerading as comfort, unnoticed except as a distant, abstract irritation.
Slowly, deliberately, I swung my legs over the edge of the bed, feet landing softly on cold floorboards that creaked in protest beneath my weight. The room was quiet, too quiet, except for that relentless hum. I glanced toward the wooden door, its paint peeling in curls, exposing scars of older colors beneath. Shadows hovered silently around its edges, patient and expectant.
I rose and moved across the room, each step measured and unhurried, hand reaching out toward the brass knob dulled by years of touch. My fingers curled around it; the metal felt cool, impersonal. Turning slowly, carefully, I allowed the door to swing inward. Darkness poured in smoothly, gliding up my hand, winding gently around my wrist, whispering silently along my arm and chest. It slipped inside effortlessly, entering through my eyes, my ears, my mouth, my nose - familiar, polite, but always distant. Always separate.
With a sigh that held no breath of feeling, I pushed the door closed, hearing the soft click of its latch. Returning to the bed, I paused before the worn armchair near the fireplace, its upholstery frayed, threads hanging loose in surrender. The fireplace itself lay cold and empty, long untouched by flame or warmth. A few charred logs sat haphazardly, covered in ash, waiting for nothing.
I settled into the chair, feeling the rough fabric press lightly against my back, staring at the shadowed fireplace as if waiting for something to emerge. A tale, perhaps. An old story from a childhood that felt as distant and fictional as the books gathering dust on shelves nearby. But nothing stirred. The silence around me deepened, accepting my quiet offering without response.
My gaze shifted back toward the door, its edges darkened by a presence lingering patiently. Unmoving, ever present. A polite visitor who required neither invitation nor dismissal. I turned my eyes away, resting them on my empty hands folded calmly in my lap.
Perhaps I was something of a Scrooge myself. Visited by specters in the quiet of the night, but unlike him, I hoarded apathy instead of wealth. My currency was numbness, an intangible treasure that accumulated quietly within, impossible to spend or share. No ghosts of past, present, or future could stir a heart frozen and unresponsive. Yet they came anyway, drawn to the silence, perhaps curious, perhaps just polite. They stood patiently, their hollow eyes fixed upon my stillness, their transparent hands extended toward emptiness. And still, I could offer nothing but quiet acknowledgment, no warmth or cold, just the unchanging neutrality of existence.
I had no more stories to tell. The quiet innkeeper within me had run dry, the bottles empty, the shelves bare. Yet, the shadow stayed, content in its own quiet, unwavering patience.
Perhaps, I mused idly, this was what immortality felt like - a silent, endless sitting with nothing left to share, nothing left to feel, just shadows dancing gently at the edges of perception.
My hands remained still, calm and empty. The cup ran over, and yet no one drank.
I suppose it is time to make myself immortal.

We called it Messenger 5
Blackjack happened in the elevator at night—even the campus officer joined, half amused, half serious.
We sportscast SupCom on the common room TV,only one of us knowing what the game was.
Twenty seven strode, questing onward, gear gleaming,rolling dice on textbooks, conjuring dragons in a room that was a little too warm.
My tiny dorm, forever crowded, became the “third common room,”up all night only for me to wake up early and start again.
All warfare is based on deception.
We’d steal eachothers keys, and wallets, and peepholes, and a chair, and a common room couch… 
All-terrain wheels on a knee scooter, hallways into racetracks,a lockpick set jingling in pockets just in case.
Doors never received polite knocks,we slammed, cheerfully announcing our presence without apology.
Star Wars marathons blurred into Lord of the Rings binges,Thrawn and Thranduil and Aragorn and Anakin.
If Morgan Hall was having a bad day, so were our stomachs.Slowly you’ll all convert to my music taste, I’m well on my way.
Poker nights folded into Magic: The Gathering,
I’d wager something was never quite right.
Don’t even get me started on the quotes chat.
Guess I’m a tour guide now. I’ll be 85 by April.
We scoured campus for hidden passages, half-bored, half-thrilled,then roamed outside, clinging to one another on late-night walks.
Blood on the Clocktower fueled wild accusations, you all learned to lie.When snow fell, we skied down Unity Hill with reckless abandon.
By morning, I’d post silly poems online, hoping to capture it all.
You’re all so pretty.

The world wakes up and cries out as a chorus of voices longing for that which they do not have. All the plants open their pores and all the animals move under the canopy. The smell washes over the earth as water from the sky does the ground. It permeates the earth, a percolating peat-smelling perfume. It is nature’s quiet exhale tangled in mineral echoes. It lingers softly, spun from the breath of stone and the ghostly sighs of forgotten rain. Hints of time-worn moss and the enigmatic sweetness of renewal intermingle, a scent crafted by ephemeral alchemy. You might catch it just once, fleeting as a whispered verse, leaving your soul nostalgic for something you've always known but never truly named. It is that which hugs you as you cuddle inside under a blanket. It is that which accompanies the resounding patter of heavenly tears upon asphalt. It is that which cradles the hands of earth and sky as they clasp together once again, joyously reunited after so long. It is that which coaxes from the stones a million tiny memories of its last passing - bringing with it the cleansing and beautiful melody of that life-giving ichor. Neither flower nor flame, yet blooming incandescently nonetheless, it hints at something antique yet newborn - like the breath of a sleeping deity stirred momentarily awake. An aromatic palindrome, it moves backward and forward through sensation, leaving only echoes to puzzle your curiosity, inviting you to guess at the intangible essence that gently, insistently, haunts the edges of recognition. Sometimes brought with wind keener than the keenest blade contrived or softer than a saber’s precise drive. So it is, so again it will be. Tomorrow and again and again the next.

Where ARE the boots that marched so bold?
 In bronze they trod, once proud and strong;
 They lie in dust, their story told,
 And hush recalls in shadows’ song.

Where lies the cloak once richly dyed?
 The purple tint now fades to gray;
 Its golden threads once gently cried,
 Beneath regrets now tucked away.

Where lies the goblet, gilt with gold?
 Its silver tarnished, wine all gone;
 Lost echoes tell of feasts untold,
 As ghosts of mirth now sigh undone.

Where lies the armor, strength it bore?
 The shield lies shattered, emblem gone;
 The lion’s prowl shall rise no more,
 A silent ward on fields forlorn.

Where rests the book whose pages blur?
 Salt-stained, each line with trembling hand;
 “Forgive me,” wafts the whispered whir,
 As tears of ink bleed on the sand.

Where lie the embers, once so sweet?
 Their fragrant bloom consumed by gloom;
 No woodsmoke warms these hands we greet,
 A chill enshrouds this hollow room.

Where stands the hourglass, cracked with care?
 Its grains lie still, the course undone;
 In frozen time, it hangs in air,
 These moments fall beneath no sun.

Where hangs the portrait, gaze afar?
 Its colors pale, once scarlet bled;
 Those eyes, they searched some distant star,
 Now faded forms in dreams have fled.

Gone, gone, the echoes sound so deep,
 Dim relics haunt with sorrow’s weight;
 Here still they linger, drowned in sleep,
 Remembered shades, forsaken fate.

Ink and tears upon the sand.

Where embers cold, their scent once sweet,
Lavender lost in ashen gloom?
Woodsmoke's warmth no more to greet,
Chill pervades this empty room.

Where the hourglass, cracked with care,
Grains unmoved, its course undone?
Frozen time, suspended there,
Moments stilled beneath no sun.

Where the portrait, gaze afar,
Colors faded, scarlet bled?
Eyes that sought some distant star,
Faces pale, their dreams long fled.

Gone, gone, the echoes deep,
Silent relics, sorrow-laden;
Here they linger, lost in sleep,
Memories of the forsaken.

There is a little homunculus under my bed.
Born of blood and fear and love.
It’s in a little dog crate.
I raised it as a devout catholic.
Sometimes I’ll poke it with a stick
When I want a prayer answered.
And the little homunculus will clasp its grubby paws
And the little homunculus will gaze up to the sky
And the little homunculus will chant some latin
And the little prayers are always heard.
Because the little homunculus has never known sin.
I remember how we’d lie together on the floor of my room. Just chatting, platonically, of course. You’d have your feet kicked up on my windowsill and I’d have my back to the wall. You were wearing Adidas sweatpants and a white and blue t-shirt. I was probably wearing a cardigan and cargo pants. The rest of our friends had just left. They had been hanging out and we had played D&D. Your hands were likely still fidgeting with your dice. They were cool, being metal and all that. You were still here and would spend the night like you usually did. You’d stretch out on the couch and I’d sleep on a beanbag. We wouldn’t really sleep, just talk. I would wish for you to maybe just reach behind you and put your hand on mine. Maybe just take one step farther than we were both comfortable with. That wouldn’t happen though. That was okay, I like to think so much of our tension came of so much unrequited love. So we’d stay up late and talk. You’d tell me about this cool character concept you had and I’d tell you about this girl I’d fallen for. You’d tell me about your crush and I’d give you advice. Ultimately the advice didn’t work, and it really made it look like I had cheated when it was all said and done. I had never meant for it to be that way, I am sorry I wasn’t there for you more when it all fell apart. I still remember that night when we took the RTD train back from that show; Happy birthday.
You were the first person who made me question what friendship was supposed to feel like. I think I knew, even then, that I loved you more than you loved me. You were my best friend, but I always felt like I was just another person to you - someone you enjoyed being around, but not someone you needed. I wanted so badly to hear you say otherwise, to tell me I was the person you’d call first with good news, or the one you’d turn to when everything felt like it was falling apart. Instead, I watched you laugh with other people, watched you prioritize them in ways you never did with me. I tried to convince myself that I was being paranoid, overthinking something that didn’t need to be so complicated. 
Maybe I should have fought harder to stay loyal to the fragile connection we still had. I didn’t, though. I left you, not alone, but I left you. You kept your Logan and I kept mine. I’ll never forget the way you looked at me when everything finally ended. There was no anger in us by the end, just a quiet disappointment in both of us that I’ll carry with me forever. You didn’t have to say anything for me to know that I’d lost you completely. But I believe the exact words you used were:
”Arrogant, narcissistic, sociopathic cunt.” How tasteful. I am sorry, I was stupid, but I know I was not wrong.
I am known by all the people who I’ve hurt. I know all of them too. I still think of you every time I play D&D, your character is still referenced occasionally. I wonder if you’re in the same spot as me - struggling to enjoy a major you know you want to do. Finance, right? I still think of you every time I worry about my own future - trying to become someone successful like my dad - or your dad. I think of the nights we spent driving on I-70 way beyond a safe speed and the nights I spent sitting in your house watching your dogs while you were away on a trip. I still reread the messages you used to send me, some are lovely and some are brutal. Why did you have to be so threatening when it all ended? Why couldn’t it die with ice instead of fire? I still listen to your playlists when I’m sad, you always had a knack for making playlists that you could be miserable with.

You remain near home, counting the days until college no doubt.
You were so far away for so long.
I had finally stopped exploring when I found you.
I pride myself on reading people.
The discerning reader may find that cliche.
I disagree.
You could not be read. I still don’t understand you.
From the beginning I was intrigued, allured, and enraptured.
It’s remarkable. I aspire to be as you are.
You’ll never know how much you inspired me.
And the cruel joke of it is that every time I was dismissed.
And I loved it. I’m never dismissed.
I met you at junior prom, well, not really. I saw you there. You saw me too, but only in the way the sun sees the stars. The sun could love all the stars in the sky, yes, but never as an equal. We each thought about talking to one another but that would be silly. You hate me. 
I’ve known you since third grade. We’d sit on the sidelines of my younger brother's little league soccer and I would be reading a book like I often did as a kid. Something with dragons and knights and wizards and magic. You’d strut up, sassy as always and tell me I was a slow reader. I was the faster reader, but I went along with it because we liked the same books and it was an excuse to keep talking. You’d always get bored of talking though so we’d kick around a soccer ball. We played lots of little soccer games, you won those more often than not. Our parents always joked that “one day we’d get married” but that quickly stopped when our brothers stopped playing soccer together in 5th grade. I didn’t see you after that for a long time, I was going to a different middle school than you. I would see you again though, there was only one high school in our little town. By the time high school rolled around everyone thought we were going to be awfully competitive. You were smart, quick-witted, and had a reputation among your peers as being incredibly argumentative. You were the girl in school who took all AP, was motivated, and had a reputation for being a bit hard to work with. I took all AP too, and I always did better than you. I suppose it must have hurt your self-esteem a little when I got perfect grades without once having to study. So I was valedictorian, you were 5th. You spread rumors that I was an idiot and somehow must be cheating to be that good. I suppose even in high school you found a way to call me a slow reader.
Now, all of this is to say, you weren’t fond of me. And even though we (somehow) never ended up in a class together, I always thought it was touching that you dedicated so much time to “orchestrating” my “academic downfall”. At least that’s what your friend called it. Sometimes I wonder if you were too competitive for your own good. 
I’m still not entirely sure how it happened, but it seems that around junior prom you had finally caved to the peer pressure to download Snapchat (a choice most high schoolers were facing at that junction) and since I used it I imagine I must have added you. Weirdly, we had started to talk over Snapchat - normal talking. Nothing rude, well, okay, a little rude. But then you did the most inexplicable unexpected wildly delusional thing - you asked me out. I think it was just for ice cream - there was a new place that had just opened up near our houses - so out we went.
You taught me to love the risks of life, but only because I was so safe for you. We went to concerts and parties and late nights with your friends. Your parents never approved but they didn’t have to know. They just loved me. Me and my good grades and my witty banter. Someone who would always debate them and talk to them. Someone they could invite over to dinner without even a hint of embarrassment. They’ve known me since 3rd grade after all. You liked that too. You liked how your parents trusted me with you, and so they trusted you more too. So out we’d go, doing stupid highschool things like stupid highschool students. My life became just that for a while: a polysyndeton push/pull of moment to moment to moment risk. So no wonder I fell out of love when you just wanted to use me to stay free from your parents. Some sort of two-faced straight-laced night-wild boyfriend.
I still remember those late nights though, but I don’t think I want to go back. Babysitting you while you were drunk and in love started to wear on me. But the way you’d stare into my eyes while we’d stand outside at Red Rocks. The way the stone rose up around us like a great red hand clasping at the sky and cradling us as the music played. I’d wrap myself in your arms like you were a blanket and I’d watch you as you’d speak to me.
“D’you think my parents are gonna be mad?”
“I don’t think so, love.”
“Are you gonna drive us home?”
“Yes, love.”
“Is it late?”
“Just a little bit, love.”
“I’m sorry”
“Don’t be sorry, love.”
“Do you feel alright?”
“Jubilant, love.”
I am known by all the people who have hurt me. I know all of them too. I keep the book of flower pictures you made me in my bedside drawer. I wear the shirt you got me at the Arctic Monkeys concert when we really didn’t have a single care in the world. Our brothers play soccer together again, I hear the team is doing pretty good. I still chat with your parents on the sideline when I visit. They’re still happy to see me, despite your best wishes. Every time I drive by your family's bookstore I always look to see if your car is parked on the side of the road where I remember it being. Every day I wear the little ring you gave me, the one with the little moons that waxed and waned again and again and again.

Upon the page in ebony
I spoke of them in words so tall.
With hair like flowing locks of gold,
With eyes prismatic emerald.
Where there we had a deepened sense
of onyx thoughts so tenderly
That I’d lay down and die that day
In casket of chalcedony.
We watched the sunset from your bed
With starry garnished garnet shade.
I spoke to you of flowers dead
My soul lit zircon where we lay.
I met you in October, on the 3rd week of Ms. Brim’s AP world history class, at the second table in the back left of the room. Yet I first knew you in November. I remember the bangs you had that sat on your face right above your eyes. I remember the cat hoodie you wore and the beat up converse shoes. These aren’t really what I remember though. It started with that first time we went hiking up in Alderfer. We climbed up the tall rocks that sat in the center of the park and I held your hand as you pulled me up the last cliff. You learned I was terrified of heights then. That was when you began to know me.
We sat in the parking lot for hours afterwards listening to music in my car and talking about anything. I’ve always struggled with small talk since then. It wasn’t ever really the same. The jubilant feeling of being loved, unfortunately, cannot exist without the horrifying finality of being known. There is no connection that can come of anything but an open heart. 
That Christmas, I spent the time at your house. The first time I wasn’t home with my family. You climbed up onto the bannister to the left of the spiral staircase in the living room. Your hands felt around behind you, grabbing the windowsill as you stood almost ten feet above me in the air. I told you not to fall. As if that mattered. You fell anyway. Although not from the bannister. Your hands slowly reached up and put the ornament I gave you up on the Christmas tree. A little chimera suspended on sterling silver string. Higher up than anything else. I told you just to focus on climbing. Don’t look at me, don’t look at me Orpheus. You made your way back down and I caught you as you fell on the last couple stairs - so close to making it down unscathed. Don’t look at me. So close to making it down without slipping. I never saw that bannister again. I never saw that Christmas tree. But what was there to complain of? Eurydice had been loved, to love someone you will look at them anyways. God! The way you’d always complain that my writing got too meta, the way you’d always tell me to keep doing it.
When you looked back at me, I felt like you saw who I really was. You really knew me. At that time, I felt I was loved. I still remember all the little dates we went on with Logan - she had never liked third wheeling but she liked us. All those late nights spent ice skating when we were the only people there and I felt like the night would never end. I knew you. I know the way your eyes would tear up whenever you stood too fast and the way your ears would turn bright red when you were embarrassed. Your cats are named Sage, Midnight, and Buttercup - Butter always liked me more than you. I know your favorite cereal is “Frosted Mini-Wheats” and the first time you tried it was at a hotel in California when you were 8. I know how you struggled to stand out in orchestra since viola players never got major roles, you became section leader anyways. I know that when you called me perfect you really just meant good because nobody had ever brought you flowers before. Hydrangeas were always your favorite by the way.
I am known by all the people who have loved me. I know all of them too. I’m always overjoyed whenever I see another viola player take the spotlight - you always said they never got enough representation. I still make your tortilla soup recipe every Christmas Eve. Tomorrow I’m flying halfway across the country to see a Saint Motel concert, a band you showed me on our first date. I still remember. I listen to your playlists with wired earbuds, you always said Bluetooth had no “romance”. The blanket you gave me when I was sick, sits on the end of my dorm bed - three years later - more comfortable than any comforter. You were right, I am a sucker for a good meta-narrative. You’re gone from my life but now I write beautiful words to immortalize the joy you’ve given me. I put thoughts to words so I don’t forget, your memory becoming the mythology I allude to in my own writing. I hope I never forget your voice, dear muse, but I fear I already have.

By 
A day I sought to make a poem,
I took the pencil in my hand.
I folded scroll and sorrow song,
I laid it out upon the sand.
The beast its ugly head had reared
With dreaded thought I fought it back,
With push and pull - grim errantry
Entreat my soul to crimson black. 
The sun had risen heliod
Upon the ocean’s hazy hue.
I sat and wrote for hour more–
Upon the shore I smote its ruin.
Eradication stationed here
Procrastinating writer’s block.
Elucidation coming close,
My heart had fluttered under lock.
I held the notebook sapphire blue,
The pen of color ruby red,
The fountain point a sharpened blade
Where thoughts to home and hearth had fled.
Upon the page in ebony
I spoke of her in words so tall.
Her hair like flowing locks of gold,
Her eyes prismatic emerald.
Remember in November then
When loving seemed so far away
When juniors we had just become
When I would seek you every day.
We trekked in wood on rocks we climbed,
I knew you were the one for me.
As time with you had drifted by
I simply faltered happily.
We shared in music, art, and math–
in nerdy things we both pursued
the polymathic classic case
of everything I did peruse.
I was scared I cared for you
more than what you did for me
but every day you did assure
that you had tried to care for me.
There we had a deepened sense
of onyx thoughts so tenderly
That I’d lay down and die that day
In casket of chalcedony.
We watched the sunset from your bed
With starry garnished garnet shade.
I spoke to you of flowers dead
My soul lit zircon where we lay.
Mosaic’s you had made in me–
a gifted guided sculptors hand.
You cried in arms of mine at night
tears melting glass out of the sand.
Your sweater smelled of lilac sage,
Your hand was guided to the ground.
The consonance and consequence
And assonance frolicked around.
Late that day we went to yours,
I saw your parents there with He.
the changer of your mind had wrought
discordant plots of symphony.
Your parents asked me how I was
I told to them some diamond truths,
Your dad had asked what I would do
his tongue bitter with sweet vermouth.
Your cats crept underfoot aware
that there they could be loved by two
of opal eyes alight with joy –
joining eyes that looked at you.
That night the sun had set again
and topaz beams had settled by,
with love I touched you on your head,
with love I gazed into your eyes.
Had I known what you would do
I would not have simplified:
The words I said should have been caught,
I’d let you know I’m terrified.
So please remember that I cared,
So please remember that I lost
the part of me I gave to you
down below the winter’s frost.
A poet of quite quiet cold
With slanting rhymes my heart to fill.
In winter now I write some more
Sitting upon my windowsill.
A windless winter blew my way
spineless did it in darkness creep
With wings of silk and soft and day
its ilk brought death and suffering.
Muffled cries of painless sorrow
‘morrow day could not be mourned.
In knowing what I sought to find
my self and soul I found I spurned.
Of days from that old crooked year
I wrote not of the jubilance,
At once the joy I used to sing
I gazed in sad exuberance.
I know you’re here, the monster slain
I long to not forget your voice.
The trees are cold and soft and gray.
Please make not hard my wicked choice.
Remember when we skated ‘round
the lake by our forgotten homes?
Our gloves pulled tight our hats worn down,
Idle thoughts within our phones.
That day in class you held my hand,
to sand of beach I did return,
A moment of lucidity.
You did to me a ruthless burn
discerning not what it would do.
What portent prayer it’d require,
you’d done not more horror to me,
You’d baptized me in holy fire.
You called me late that night at home
When sleep to me could never fall.
Fallen leaves around me drifted
When then my sorrow soul was called.
A day will come when I forget
As stars out over us will wheel,
Cosmic insignificance,
This poem will be just how I’ll feel.

I dream of hopeless romances and evening dances and nights spent out on the town.
I dream of life filled with struggle and strife but one where I pull through.
But best of all, within this song, you’ll find a simple truth.
Not one single word from here on - at all - involves you.
Talking improper I offer a proposition, a rightful inquisition
A frightful delightful insightful conversation
Matching our wits in the dark (for the most part)
Red wine, sublime - The life I want from you.
Streets of europe, you’re up, make it true.
I never really had this, I wanted it
But thing about wants is life stops it
And makes you wish it hadn’t flaunted it.
I’ve never met someone like you,
You make me feel a hope,
Make me a helpless allotrope 
That is selfless, thinking about less
I wish it’s real but nope, can we elope yet?
Damn.
The cobblestones I wander I ponder
And think, about fonder times - 
A happier day away from the voices
That tell me I can’t make my choices
I’ll never be happy.
I know, I won’t.
But if you’re real…
Reach out, let me know.
I blow every candle wishing for you
To take me home, my bones
Grow older, not bolder every day
Charisma fades away (it’s okay)
I’ve forgotten how to play
To live, laugh and love
There’s no more white dove.
I can’t think of how many futures I’ve promised
Dishonest I know, but you go
You tell me how to live right, without fright
Every night I wonder if i’m half-right
But the thing about fright-ening shit
Is it’s the unenlightening shit that’s
Really the heightening shit
You said let’s “do it together”
Whether or not we weather the weathering
Storm, endeavouring to spend my days bettering
Myself, and fettering my dreams
Around the place, you hurt me, don’t desert me
Oh wait, you did.
Real life isn’t poetic, but it’s the aesthetic
The ascetic, phonetic flow it’s kinetic,
Sounds stupid. I know.
And I quote: “If it’s an optimist you seek I’ll speak of hope”
The sorta words that fill your heart with ecstasy and plunge it into fire
Higher and higher every day
Balancing on a wire, tireless
Until it goes away. I’ll find a way
I’ll say, “I love you, if I may”
Your first text to me was “huh”
Well, uhhh, that's strange.
The human experience can encompass
Only so much, my columbus, I stand
with a compass from a stranger, 2000 miles away.
I promised this wouldn’t be about you, but it is.
You gave me everything I needed, without you, I’d be dead.
A hopeless emotional wreck.
A tiny speck.
Of life in a universe that cares not
About a lot that takes its spot i never
Really wrought a conclusion
From the fires of existence.
Would it be great if you never got so distant
Your light is getting dimmer, the world is none the wiser.
Hey, long time no talk - care to take a little walk?

Nothing scares me more than the fact the I might become ugly to the person who told me all the stars were in my eyes
Nothing scares me more than the fact the solid black line I once had becomes more gray by the day.
I wish to cast off the veil of parting that envelopes me and send into its darkness all of the light I have within me.
Another day dawns and I still forget who I trust and what I want and how I love and where I am and why I’m here and when it will all end.
If I am to give you my sorrows then I must wholly have all that you are and I must drink of it like a desert in a rainstorm.
I have so much for you, and I can’t have it because it’s not mine and I can’t give it to anyone because it’s yours and it’s all yours.
I seek not to become anything but merely unbecome what I am not, to unbecome all that is unbecoming of me.
There is a great triumph in crashing when you should be soaring and falling through the sun-laced sky painted gold.
It is your greatest privilege to find me utterly incomprehensible and I wish most sincerely that I haunt you.
There is such great grief in knowing I cannot be every version of myself that I know to be inside my heart and soul.
My life is like a lithobraking maneuver heading to a negative periapsis and I am ablative and covered in engine rich exhaust.
If you want to cook you may burn down the house and if you want to play then wreck all my furniture and if it is art you want then tear it all up.
One day you will be older and waving goodbye to your best friend and you’ll never know that was the last time you’d talk.
You will think about how long the days were and how you could have held their hand if you had just tried to do it.
They are beautiful and you will one day be struck by it in all its grand vicissitudes and minute details and you will be still for a moment.
Please stay for another cup of tea my dear, the days are so short and getting shorter and you are so lovely.
You are not a monster but a monster is not such a bad thing, it is merely a messenger of catastrophe and a lighthouse all the same.
There are a hundred Eskimo words for snow and a hundred Egyptian words for sand but the way you take my hand and rub your thumb, there are not words for that.

By the little drawer with the tea sat a table
Books sat there
My wax seal
A couple mugs
A box full of letters
A jar full of notes
A drawer full of flavorful readily brewable motes
Black tea for you
My mom always green
I had the rooibos
My friends had no tea
Sometimes the mint
Only when I was sick
I’d crawl out of bed
crawl to the corner
crawl to the kettle
flip the lever
crawl back to bed
let my tea steep
by the little drawer with the tea
it wasn’t cheap
I had tea from Istanbul, Cape Town
Tea from London and Kenya
Tea from my dad who’d travel
unraveling little bags
sometimes loose leaf
Tea from Japan, Mongolia
Sometimes Peru
A little drawer full of tea
Gifts from all of you
I’d sit on my window
reading my books
I’d sip on my tea
you’d give me those looks
of quiet apprehension
”do you like it?”
I hope so
I do like it
I love my little drawer with the tea
I love all of its stories
packages of colorful tea and its glories

You're sharper than a knife can slice, 
Swifter than a sword’s device. 
Stronger than a bow at draw, 
Because you leave me in utter awe. 
If your sharpness were a blade to wield, 
No armor forged could form a shield. 
It’d shatter steel, cut straight and true, 
And cleave my heart clean through and through. 
If a blade were as sharp as you are grand, 
It’d split at the touch of its own hand. 
If my heart could match your endless might, 
I’d live unbroken, day and night. 
If my thoughts could move as quick as you, 
I'd turn the world with words anew. 
If my travels were as fast as your fire, 
The path would end at my desire. 
If I burned as fierce as you inspire, 
I’d crumble to ash in my own pyre. 
The air would vanish from my chest, 
For space would hold your strength at rest. 
It’d fill the skies, the stars, the moon, 
And I can’t wait to see you soon. 

“Nonsense”

In passion’s ashen twisted despair,
So it returnéd with hate in its heart.
I was invested the moment you were involved,
How the silence keeps you company.
The way the light fell when she was gone.
Biting battling bone-wide boreholes
Protected from darkness that creeps.
Sanctity! Judge, jury, and executioner.
Memories drift like whispers on the breeze,
When you are simply left with the silence between the stars.
simply plotting idle letters, scattered…
Just to call themself a person in this tense.
A windless winter blew my way
Softly slowly slumbering down.
You fell anyway.
With Autumns of laughter, winters of gall,
It’s beyond its woven war torn castle walls.
time reframed by the edge of your laughter,
Catching life like a cold, or something viral.
The way her breath turned sharp at dawn,
of a hasty headstrong youth heading.
Sometimes the thoughts hit me violently.
Heresy! Blaspheme out the maker?
Reason grapples with a restless tide,
And the grey veil of parting envelopes all that is,
Infinite monkeys on infinite keyboards
Polite smiles hide what’s grim,
Muffled cries of painless sorrow
But what was there to complain of?

The purpose of a storyteller is not to tell you how to think, but to give you questions to think upon

Belief isn't simply a thing for fair times and bright days...What is belief - what is faith - if you don't continue in it after failure?...Anyone can believe in someone, or something that always succeeds...But failure...ah, now, that is hard to believe in, certainly and truly. Difficult enough to have value. Sometimes we just have to wait long enough...then we find out why exactly it was that we kept believing...There's always another secret.

And so, does the destination matter? Or is it the path we take? I declare that no accomplishment has substance nearly as great as the road used to achieve it. We are not creatures of destinations. It is the journey that shapes us. Our callused feet, our backs strong from carrying the weight of our travels, our eyes open with the fresh delight of experiences lived

Somehow, we'll find it. The balance between whom we wish to be and whom we need to be. But for now, we simply have to be satisfied with who we are.

I try to avoid having thoughts. They lead to other thoughts, and—if you’re not careful—those lead to actions. Actions make you tired. I have this on rather good authority from someone who once read it in a book.

He saw it in her eyes. The anguish, the frustration. The terrible nothing that clawed inside and sought to smother her. She knew. It was there, inside. She had been broken. 
Then she smiled. Oh, storms. She smiled anyway. 
It was the single most beautiful thing he’d seen in his entire life.

Why hasn't anyone killed him yet?”
“Dumb luck,” Wit said. “In that I’m lucky you’re all so dumb.

Yes, I began my journey alone, and I ended it alone. 
But that does not mean that I walked alone.

How remarkable, if you spend your life knocking people down, you eventually find they won't stand up for you. There’s poetry in that, don’t you think?

I will not lie by saying every day will be sunshine. But there will be sunshine again, and that is a very different thing to say. That is truth. I promise you, you will be warm again.

“Thinking is a dangerous pastime”

City folk, particularly politicians, were intimidated by small arms. They preferred to kill people with more modern weapons, like poverty and despair.

You are whatever you want to be. You're the wind. You're the stars. You are all endless things

Act 1
(Verse 1)
GIRL:
(Singing softly, melancholic)
"I’ll never find joy, it seems out of reach,
In whispers and dreams, you silently teach.
Each candle blown out, still wishing for you,
To guide me back home, as years they accrue.

(Chorus)
(Increasing intensity, a mix of hope and despair)
Charisma fades, it's slipping away,
Forgotten the play, the light of the day.
No doves in the sky, just clouds hanging low,
Promises lie, where did the truth go?

(Verse 2)
(Reflective, introspective)
You preach of a life, free of the fear,
Each night I wonder, if the answer is near?
In shadows and doubts, the fright takes its hold,
Unenlightened thoughts, in whispers so cold.

(Bridge)
(Faster pace, a hint of anger and frustration)
“You said 'together', through storms, we'd endeavor,
To better our days, in so many ways.
But you left me here, in silence, in tears,
Real life's not a song, but pain lingers on.

(Chorus)
(Sorrowful, longing)
The words that you spoke, of hope and of dreams,
Lifted me high, then tore at the seams.
On a wire I stand, in a tireless land,
Waiting for you, to reach out your hand.

(Verse 3)
(Speaking, a direct address, as if to an unseen figure)
Your first word to me, just a simple 'huh',
Strange as it seems, it was enough.
From miles away, a stranger's decree,
A compass you gave, in a world lost at sea.

(Bridge)
(Softly, a sense of realization)
I said not of you, but here we are,
You were my north star, from near and from far.
In a universe cold, uncaring, unkind,
You were the story, in my mind.

(Outro)
(Slow, fading)
Hey, long time no talk, let's take a walk,
In dreams, in the dark, you were my spark.
[Girl gets into bed, the lights dim. Stage transition.]
[Scene: Split stage. On one side, GRANDMOTHER sits at a desk, writing a letter. On the other, GIRL is in her room, surrounded by mundane life. A sense of longing and distance is evident.]
[Doorbell rings]
POSTMAN: Hey, letter for you.
GIRL: Thanks…
[Girl walks over to her desk and opens the letter]
GIRL: Grandma? Why in the world would she write to me… I haven’t heard from her since I was a kid. 
(Verse 1 - GRANDMOTHER)
GRANDMOTHER:
(Singing softly, with warmth)
I know its been a while…
I know that I’ve been distant
But let me explain -

(Verse 1 - GIRL)
GIRL:
(Reading the letter, curious and reflective)
-But how? Why now?
Why reach out and try?
When they died, you weren’t standing by!
GRANDMOTHER:
Just join me in the country
Just join me upstate?
Just please come visit
Just spend a moment, I pray

Trust me I know
Oh I know,
I know what loss is
It’s touched my heart

[Stage Direction: GIRL begins to pace, contemplating. GRANDMOTHER looks out the window, hopeful.]
GIRL:
Why reach out now when the going gets tough?
Every missed birthday or christmas wasn’t enough?
Even through struggle, trouble and pain
I’ve fought and earned my own life in my lane.
[Now simultaneous]
GRANDMOTHER:
Just join me in the country
Join me upstate?
Just please come visit
Spend a moment, I pray

GIRL
10 years of loneliness
10 years to wait
10 years now to visit?
Why must you be this way?

(Chorus - Both)
GRANDMOTHER & GIRL:
(harmonizing)
Maybe they’re hurting like me
It’s a short journey upstate anyway
So many years, 

GIRL: Guess I’m going upstate.
[Stage Direction: GIRL starts to pack a bag, still singing. GRANDMOTHER folds the letter, sending it with a wish.]

(Verse 2 - GRANDMOTHER)
GRANDMOTHER:
(Singing with a hint of sadness)
"Years slipped away, in silence,
Wilted lilies, roses and violence.
My home to share, with love and care,
For you, my grandchild, I want to be there."

(Verse 2 - GIRL)
GIRL:
(Singing with a mix of hope and uncertainty)
"Could this be a sign, to change the line,
Of a life that's been, less than divine?
With each packed attire, grows a new fire,
To find the love, I deeply desire."

[Stage Direction: GIRL finishes packing. She takes a deep breath, ready for a new journey.]

Add dialoge here

[Stage Direction: GIRL exits her room, the stage transitions to show her journey.]

(Outro - GIRL)
GIRL:
(Arriving at GRANDMA'S door, singing with newfound determination)
"Here at your door, I stand with awe,
A new chapter, in life's raw draw.
Grandma, I'm here, with hope and fear,
In your world, let's make it clear."

[End of song. GIRL knocks on the door. Lights fade as GRANDMA opens it, welcoming her.]
Scene: Grandmother's living room. The atmosphere is tense and charged. GRANDMA sits anxiously as GIRL enters, her demeanor guarded and resentful.

(Verse 1 - GRANDMA)
GRANDMA:
(Singing, with a mix of desperation and regret)
"Welcome, child, to this silent house,
A home of echoes, as quiet as a mouse.
My heart's been aching, in these rooms so bare,
Longing for a kin, someone to care."
Add “respectless” intro to intro of this song?
(Verse 1 - GIRL)
GIRL:
(Singing, with evident anger and confusion)
"Arriving here, a stranger in your den,
Years of absence, where were you then?
Your silence, a chasm, deep and wide,
Why reach now, why turn the tide?"

[Stage Direction: GIRL’s body language shows her frustration. GRANDMA’s expression is one of pain and regret.]

(Chorus - Both)
GRANDMA & GIRL:
(Singing, voices filled with emotion)
"Generations clash, in this shared space,
A storm of feelings, we're face to face.
Words unspoken, now rising like a wave,
In this welcome, can we be brave?"

[Stage Direction: GRANDMA reaches out, but GIRL steps back, maintaining her distance.]

(Verse 2 - GRANDMA)
GRANDMA:
(Singing, her voice breaking)
"In this quiet home, I've drowned in guilt,
Walls have witnessed, the life I've built.
A chance to reconcile, too late to seize?
In my twilight years, I beg you, please."

(Verse 2 - GIRL)
GIRL:
(Singing, with a mix of sorrow and bitterness)
"An offer made, in my darkest hours,
A gesture too late, now turns sour.
Where were you in my time of despair?
A belated reach, does it show you care?"

[Stage Direction: The emotional gap between them is palpable. GIRL’s words hang heavily in the air.]

(Bridge - Both)
GRANDMA & GIRL:
(Singing, their voices intertwining with raw emotion)
"In this tense air, can we find a path,
To heal these wounds, to calm the wrath?
A bridge to cross, in this night so long,
In our welcome, can we be strong?"

[Stage Direction: GIRL turns away, her emotions simmering. GRANDMA watches her, torn between reaching out and holding back.]

(Outro - GIRL)
GIRL:
(Singing, as she retreats to her room)
"Goodnight in a house where secrets dwell,
In dreams perhaps, we’ll break this spell.
I retire now, in your home, awake,
In this welcome night, our truths at stake."

[End of song. GIRL exits to her room, leaving GRANDMA alone in her sorrow. The lights dim to signify the end of the scene.]

Scene: A quaint bedroom at night. GIRL is asleep. An old-fashioned radio crackles to life, casting a dim glow. The atmosphere is filled with a sense of intrigue and nostalgia.
(Intro - RADIO) RADIO: (Speaking in a charismatic 1920s radio announcer style) "Good evening, ladies and gentlemen, tuning in from the realm of dreams and shadows. We've got a special broadcast tonight… 
a tale of yesteryear and today, intertwined in the most curious of ways.
The observant viewer notes the parallel, takes care to tell
that no matter whether you endeavor or not, you never know your final days!
(Verse 1 - RADIO) (Speaking, with a hint of mystery) 
Here in the quiet of this slumbering room emerges a story from the gloom
Parents died in a crash abandoning her to the world, life swirled down the drain
The observant viewer notes the parallel, takes care to tell
that no matter whether you endeavor or not, you never know your final days!
[Stage Direction: The radio's glow intensifies slightly. GIRL shifts in her sleep, as if sensing the presence.]
(Narrative - RADIO) (Speaking, with a touch of nostalgia) "
Ah, the threads of time, how they connect a lineage, more intricate than one might expect
In the hush of the night, through the hum of this set, she hears echoes of family, handily
No matter whether you endeavor or not, you never know your final days!
[Stage Direction: The ambiance of the room shifts subtly, reflecting the radio's influence.]
(Monologue - RADIO) (Speaking, with an air of enigma) "Now, don't be alarmed, dear listener in the night. This voice you hear, it’s not here to cause fright. Just a humble narrator, from an era long gone, watching over this scene, as the night moves along."
[Stage Direction: GIRL seems to react to the words in her sleep, her expression one of faint recognition.]
(Outro - RADIO) (Speaking softly, fading out) 
So rest easy for now, let the night carry on. 
But remember this visit when the morning light dawns. 
From the heart of the airwaves, to your dreams, I alight. This is your friendly broadcaster, signing off for the night.
The observant viewer notes the parallel, takes care to tell
that no matter whether you endeavor or not, you never know your final days!
[End of song. The radio clicks off, the light dims, leaving the room in a peaceful darkness. GIRL continues to sleep, the air of mystery lingering.]

Away - receives letter from estranged grandmother asking if she’d want to come live with her. This scene would have the grandmother sing to narrate the letter and Girl would sing her thoughts. They’d be split on opposite parts of the stage. As the song progresses Girl would begin to get ready for travel and the song would end with her at Grandmas door.
Welcome - grandma explains her own loneliness and Girl listens and some sort of age conflict as well as the girl being annoyed grandma didn’t reach out. The song ends with Girl in bed.
I know you - a crackling radio turns on, we hear what is first unintelligible radio static and then eventually a “is this thing on? Haha! We have broadcast!”. This radio voice begins to sing about how there is something familiar about this girl in bed. Chorus is “another of the family line” or something.
It’s a deal then? - the girl wakes up to the now quiet but still crackling radio. As she goes towards it, it gets louder. She hits it a few times before turning around to the presence of Radio. She screams but radio begins to explain how nobody can hear her. The song is about Radio offering her a deal for happiness, the only cost is her eternal soul if she fails to become happy. Later in the play, when’s she’s at her lowest, Radio reveals he never wanted her soul and inspires her to set things right. Song ends with so, “it’s a deal then?”. Then quiet as Radio leaves and the girl is left in silence.
In my day - Grandma lectures her the next morning reflecting typical boomer ideals of tough it up, etc and saying that girl is lazy. This ignores the obvious issue that grandma is lonely but that isn’t revealed yet. The song ends with Girl walking away in rage.
Stay Tuned - Girl is sleeping when the radio crackles to life. Radio walks on stage and remarks how it’s been a long time since someone this young has been here. A young woman walks on stage and walks next to him, they chat for a bit as old friends about Girl. There is a fond send off then Radio exits. Radio is grandmas dead husband.
Memory Deluge - the girl wakes up and goes downstairs only to find grandma is not there. The memories begin, as she stares in awe and confusion, the young woman approaches from behind and jokingly scares her. 
Blah blah lots of memories, somewhere in here the young woman is revealed to be the spirit of grandma who passed in the night. At the end of the play, as the girl exits the dream state, she is holding grandmas lifeless hand and crying, the play ends here with a final number of Radio and Grandma.
Radio lurks and views proudly the memories and is ultimately a good character tho the audience should be suspicious 

I think I need directions
On how to best pretend
That I am not afraid
With every text I send

You’re the type of pretty
I think about at night
My head spinning wildly
And my eyes open with delight

I’m terrified, I’m sitting here
It took me an hour to just say
“I want to give you my number”
Please reach out to me okay?

I’m witless I’m sure,
So unable to start.
I yearn to get know you,
To find the best part.

Leave no stone unturned, no tome unscoured,
No dungeon left unguarded, no foe uncowered.
Go forth, O seeker, into shadowed halls,
Where mystery waits and the ancient calls.
Through forests deep where secrets lie,
Beneath stormy waves, 'neath open sky,
Unmask the hidden, unveil the truth,
For in knowledge gained lies eternal youth.
With courage in heart, with wisdom as might,
Arm yourself well against the creeping night.
No spell too ancient, no trap too tight—
For light shall prevail, in the dawn delight.
And when you return, with treasures and lore,
With tales of wonder and wisdom more,
The world shall know of the path you tread,
Of the stones unturned, the knowledge spread.

Chapter 1: Of Small Homes and Narrow Things
1
 He set His foot upon the world to measure it with weight, not law.
 He carried no banner. He bore no seal.
 The earth received Him as it receives rain.
2
 He went where the hedges narrowed and the mud held print,
 where stones kept the memory of hands long gone.
 He did not strike. He repaired.
3
 Where the ford was uncertain, He tested it with His staff.
 Where the culvert broke, He set the slabs again.
 Where a latch failed, He closed the door until it took.
4
 The hungry ate, not from a miracle of air,
 but from a loaf portioned fairly and a field mended in season.
5
 Men asked of His name and He gave them their own work back:
 “Keep the narrow things. Hold them sound.”
6
 Those who saw Him forgot to ask for signs.
 They found their roof did not leak that winter.
7
 Thus the road remembered.
 Thus the dust grew gentle beneath His tread.
8
 And at noon, when shadows sleep,
 His shadow went a little east.
 - The Canticle of the Turning Road, collected fragments
Wanderer had decided that it was time to go home.
He rose before dawn. The hamlet’s roofs were black shapes against a thin band of pale sky; frost filmed the thatch as if a hand had drawn a veil over it. Inside the cottage the hearth-glow had gone to a dull line. He dressed without noise. The woman who had given him a bench and broth had already gone to the byre; he heard the soft clatter of a pail and a cow shifting her weight. Last night she had said the latch was sound at last. He had wished her a winter without drafts. That had been enough.
His scrip held what he owned and what he needed: a twist of salt in paper, a heel of rye, a wedge of hard cheese wrapped in linen, a flint and steel tied with waxed cord, a brass needle, tallowed thread, a short roll of bandage, a wooden spoon he had carved himself when a river kept him three days. His staff was ash, iron-capped. His shoes were hobnailed and mended twice at the toe. His cloak was rough-woven, moss-colored, the hood deep enough to narrow the world when wind rose.
He stepped into the cold and the cold stepped into him. The road left by the barley stubble and crossed into the fen where reed and sedge made lines like script. The causeway stones were old. Spirals, fish, and knots lay on their faces, worn to pale ghosts of cuts. The people who set them had no speech left here. The stones held their speech.
He walked without hurry. The ground spoke if you carried your weight properly. Here the frost had lifted and left the topsoil crisp; here hooves had pressed deep two days ago; here a cart-wheel had rasped dry because the axles had gone untended. He said nothing to the air. He kept breath and pace even.
A mile-stone leaned into the ditch. Its number had gone. He bent, set his shoulder to it, pressed until it settled straight again. He wiped the mud from his hands on grass and went on.
Toward noon the path narrowed beneath a thorn bent low over it. The branches were black lines netting a strip of sky. Beside the road a wall had slumped where frost heave had worked under it. He ate a thumb of cheese and then set the fallen stones to rights. No mortar, only weight and shape, each stone finding its place by feel. When the run sat true again, he tapped the top course with his knuckles as if to wake it. Then he shouldered his scrip.
A boy waited farther on where the ground went bog-soft. His cap was too large. A sheep stood with both forelegs sunk to the shoulder in a cold pocket of clay. The boy’s jaw was set. He had not cried yet. He was at the age where crying offended the shape he hoped to keep for himself.
“Hold the head,” Wanderer said. “Keep it as still as you can.”
The boy obeyed. Wanderer stepped into the mud at an angle that would let it take one boot but not both. He levered with the staff, found the joint behind the sheep’s knee with his other hand, and worked slow. The animal came up with a sucking sound, shook itself, and painted both of them with brown water. The boy laughed once, surprised.
“The culvert failed last winter,” he said. “We told the reeve. The lord sent word. The word brought no stones.”
Wanderer crouched by the break. The old slab had slipped inward. He slid his hands beneath the edge and felt the underside for the lip the builder had cut to catch on the next stone. He found it. The boy brought rocks without being asked. They worked until the slabs lay again in order and the trickle spoke in a clean throat beneath the path.
“Leof,” the boy said finally, as if handing over a coin and watching to see if it would be respected.
“Wanderer,” he said, which was all the name he kept.
Leof gave him an oatcake from a waxoiled pouch. “My mother bakes them.”
“Tell her the culvert is proud,” Wanderer said. “It will carry a better storm before it sulks.”
Leof frowned, tested the sentence in his head, then nodded like someone making room for a fact.
They walked as far as the leaning stone at the bend. Spirals thinned across its face. Someone had chalked a rough wheel over them. Leof pointed into the bracken on the slope.
“Steps under there,” he said. “My mother says leave old things where they sink.”
Wanderer stepped off the track. He placed his feet as one does on stairs one can’t see. Under the bracken the ground held shallow treads, a long slow grade, the print left by many sandals. When he scraped a fingertip in the soil it came up with pin-black flecks of ash. There had been fires once, and bread laid on stones, and meat fat fallen and burned. He did not linger. He returned to the path and nodded to Leof, who looked as if two paths had just crossed in his mind and made a single straight one.
The ridge lifted. Pasture and hedge lay like careful stitching across the land. From there he heard water again, not where the river should be but where the roadway should have been dry. The mill-stream’s leat ran overfull; the lower sluice stood open. Farther ahead, a thatch of a wheelhouse showed above alder.
He came to Narrow-Thorn’s mill by midafternoon. The wheel hung idle, not for lack of water but for lack of control. A man in a leather apron was prying at a jam of branches with a pike. Two boys stood with grapnels fixed to cords plaited out of nettle fiber. The miller’s beard was white with flour.
“Weir’s packed wrong,” the miller grunted without looking up. “Flood took the fastening. The wheel runs when it shouldn’t and not when it should.”
Wanderer set down his scrip, took off his cloak, rolled his hose to the knee, and waded where the water slowed in an eddy. He ran his hands along the weir boards. Pegs had lifted; the lower sill had undercut, slipping from its notch. He braced his staff across two stones and pushed his shoulder against the top slab, not with a shout but with slow, sustained pressure. The wood moved a little. The miller’s eyes came up then and kept coming as if he had expected a small help and found more.
“Hold there,” Wanderer said. The boys set their grapnels hooked under the board and leaned. The miller wedged a billet into the gap. Wanderer eased off, reset, pressed again. The sill found the notch. He drove two pegs back with the heel of his hand, then the third with the iron of his staff. The flow calmed and drew straighter through the gate.
“Gate will answer to the lever now,” Wanderer said.
The miller pulled the lever. The gate rose cleanly and fell without shudder. Water took the wheel. It turned with a sound like a sack being eased onto a bench. The miller stood still and listened as a man listens to his heart resettling after a run. Then he laughed, short and disbelieving, like Leof had.
“What do I owe you?” he asked.
“Bread,” Wanderer said. “If you can spare it.”
The miller cut him a rough loaf and wrapped it in cloth. “You’ve done more than the lord did all last year.”
“Keep the pegs greased,” Wanderer said. “When the frost goes, check the sills.”
The miller nodded. He looked as if he wanted to ask a string of questions he did not know how to start. Wanderer shouldered his scrip and left him that dignity.
The road dropped to the river ford. The remains of a bridge were there - footings of dressed stone with an arc missing between them. The river lay broad and quiet, green-brown under willow. Fish-traps stood pegged in a curve near the shallows.
He tested the ford with his staff, set each step to gravel that would not roll, and crossed without hurry. On the far bank he wrung out his hose, lit a small fire of driftwood, and ate from the new loaf, careful to put the cloth back clean. The bread was heavy and good. It felt honest in the hand.
Night gathered like water in a hollow. Owls called from the alder. In the third watch he woke cleanly, as if something had tapped him between the eyes. A woman stood across the ford, bare-headed. Her gown was onion-skin yellow, mended neat. She walked the stones without a light. The river lapped at her calves and went no higher.
She sat across from him, past the fire. He saw the slate disc at her throat. A spiral cut into it caught the flame, then lost it.
“My house keeps the ford,” she said. “We mend the stones and the traps. We set hedge when the bank slips. We tell folk where to put their feet.”
He nodded.
“Today the river almost took a boy and the ram that loved him. We pulled them both up by the ears. The mother kissed me and forgot me. The boy will remember where the water deepens.”
“I mended the mill,” he said. “And a culvert. And a wall.”
“That is the same work.” She warmed her hands as if she had given him something and was glad to take heat back in exchange. “We are fewer each year. The young go up to sheep. The traps rot. The knees fail. Does the old road wake or sleep this season?”
He weighed the ground in memory: the hidden steps under bracken, the ash flecks, the leaning stone, the causeway spirals that refused to go out entirely.
“It wakes in places,” he said. “The land listens when we set things straight. It answers by holding. It does not answer with a shout.”
“That is answer enough,” she said. She stood. “If you mean to go home, keep the narrow things. That is how you will know where you are.”
She crossed back. The water took her reflection and gave nothing away.
At gray light he found a sprig of hawthorn berries tucked between two stones. The berries were red enough to make the morning look thin. He left them where they were and went on.
The path climbed. He came to a lonely chapel roofed in reed. The saint on the wall had lost half a face to damp and time. A wicker plate on a bench held three crusts and a note in an awkward hand: For those who go. He took one crust and left the brass needle he had carried longer than he needed.
Past the chapel he met a man with a bad arm driving two thin oxen. The cart behind them rattled as if a cup had been put on the wrong table. The man raised two fingers without stopping. Wanderer returned the gesture.
Midday brought him to a place where the coffin-path crossed a run of water by two planks laid side by side. One plank had split and turned. He saw the scuff where a bearer had slipped and caught himself. He set down his scrip, found drift and a length of hedge-post cut and left, and made a new stringer. He set the plank flat, drove a peg through into the post, and tested it with his weight. It held. He trimmed a thorn from the approach so a pall would not catch. He picked up his scrip and kept on.
A little after he met a pair of sisters with a bundle of laundry and a boy between them. The boy’s nose ran; his eyes were big in a thin face. They had the careful look of people who had pared their day down to what must be done. The older sister saw him first.
“Is the plank sound?” she asked.
“It is now,” he said.
She nodded and did not waste thanks. They went on. The boy had turned to look at Wanderer and then away and then back again as boys do when they do not know if a man is dangerous or dull. When they reached the stream the older sister called back, not loudly but clear.
“Thank you.”
He raised a hand.
Toward evening, the wind shifted and brought him the smell of smoke that did not belong to a hearth. He left the road by fifty paces and came on a patch of heath where ash lay gray over a low ring of stones. A hawk’s feather lay on the black. A coil of tallow had pooled and hardened around a burnt stick. He did not touch any of it. He walked the ring once, outside. The heather held footprints going in and fewer going out. He stood a moment, then went back to the road by a different line. Some work was not his.
A little before dusk he reached a village that had no stockade, only close-set houses and a ditch shallow enough to step. The reeve was standing with his arms folded in the yard of a house that leaned two inches too far west; three men were arguing with him in turns and sometimes all at once. Their wives watched with faces that had too much winter in them for patience.
“The spring runs sour,” one man said. “We draw up sand.”
“The old well is dry,” said another. “My children drink ditch water.”
“The lord’s men filled the lower pond with clay last autumn and charged us for it,” said the third. “Now everything runs wrong.”
The reeve saw Wanderer and frowned at him as if words were a kind of food and this stranger had come to share them without being invited.
Wanderer asked quietly, “Where is the spring and where is the pond?”
They took him. The pond lay in a shallow bowl below the houses. A sleeve of clay had been thrown across the outflow to make a holding lip. It had slumped and slid. Water had cut under it and taken silt into the channel. The spring lay up-slope in a copse of ash and thorn. Its stone throat was furred with moss and sand; the windlass at the wellhead creaked and turned poorly.
He set the windlass off its posts, pulled the pins, scraped and greased the axle with tallow, set it back true. He ran his hands inside the spring’s throat, scooped silt, lifted out a flat of stone that had slipped and choked the mouth. He had the men bring baskets. They fetched gravel and laid it in the outflow channel, then a bed of brush, then stones again to break the run and drop the sand. He dug a small sump pit and lined it with clods cut square. He set a short weir-board at the pond’s lip and pegged it, not to dam, only to steady the height.
“Draw here,” he said, pointing to the cleaned throat. “Keep the cover on when you are not at it. Skim the sump after rain. Clear the ditch above the copse so the spring does not take leaf rot. Check the pegs before the ground hardens.”
They did as he asked because the water had begun to run clearer even as they watched, and because he had not told them they were fools first. The reeve looked at him in that way again - half-hard, half-hopeful.
“What do we owe you?” the reeve asked, flat and wary, like a man offering a price in a market where the other trader may only be pretending to sell.
“Keep it so,” Wanderer said. “That’s the price.”
The reeve nodded once and looked at the spring as if it had just agreed to speak to him. He said to one of the wives, “Fetch him a bowl. The good one.” She brought it. Wanderer drank. The water was cold going down and sat right in his belly.
Night fell clean. They gave him a space in the bakehouse, warm with the ghost of the day’s bread. He slept with his cloak over him and his staff laid along his side. He woke once in the second watch because the fire had gone to a red eye and because some part of him always woke in the second watch. He listened. The village breathed. An ox shifted. A child coughed twice and then stopped. He slept again.
At first light he left a small thing tied to the bakehouse latch: two pegs he had shaved from oak, in case the spring’s weir loosened. He went without speaking to anyone. The road took him uphill. A wind from the north brought a smell like snow even if no snow would come for weeks.
He passed a standing-stone no taller than his shoulder. The spiral on its face had worn to a single turn. He pressed his palm to it for a heartbeat and felt only the warmth his hand gave. He stood a moment longer anyway. Then he went on.
At the ridge a flock of crows lifted and turned as one, settled again, and began to work the stubble for what the sickle had left. He watched them and they ignored him, which is how it should be.
Near noon he met a man and a girl with a laden donkey. The man’s left hand was bound to a splint; his right held the lead. The girl had a sling of stones and the look of someone who already knew how to use it. The donkey’s pack was barley in sacks and a bundle of rushes. The man looked at Wanderer as one looks at weather - measuring, uninterested unless it turns.
“There is a plank set true over the coffin-stream,” Wanderer said. “You can pass with the load.”
The man nodded without breaking step. The girl glanced twice, curious, and then grinned at nothing in particular. After they had gone a dozen paces, the man called back without turning, “Thank you.”
The ridge bent into a hollow where a yew stood. Someone had tied a knot of red thread around a lower branch. A beeswax candle in a clay dish had burned down and gone out. He righted the dish but left the thread. He took a drink, ate a piece of the miller’s bread, and went on.
He came by evening to the same river again where it had widened and slowed. The ford lay a little downstream from a jag of rock that split the current. A single alder leaned over the entry, its roots like a hand on the bank. He tested the first three steps, set his staff long, and crossed. On the far side he kindled a fire small enough to hide under his palm. He ate bread and the last of the cheese. He slept with his cloak pulled up and his hood drawn forward. He dreamed no dreams he could keep.
In the last watch a fox barked twice on the far bank. He woke and sat with his knees up, arms around them, and listened. The river ran as it had the night before and the night before that. An owl’s call came and went. He did not look for signs. He let the world be enough.
At dawn he found a track of small bare feet in the clay at the ford’s edge, leading down and up again. They had not slipped. He smiled as if he had been given a word he liked the shape of and did not need to speak.
He walked east. The ground underfoot changed, less fen, more heather and thin soil over stone. The wind went keener. The hedges came lower, then vanished. He met no one for an hour and then a pair of men with spears and patched cloaks who asked him where he had come from and where he was going. He answered plainly. They let him by with a grunt. He did not turn to see if they watched him go, yet he knew they did.
At noon he came to a barrow-field. Low humps lay across the heath with stones set in arcs at their heads. Spirals and lines cut into them had gone soft. He did not walk between the stones. He went wide and straight, counting his steps without counting them aloud. A linnet cocked its head at him from a gorse bush and then went back to its own business.
In the hollow beyond the barrows a spring rose cold under a rock lip and ran thin. Someone had set a cup of horn on a peg. He drank and then held the cup a moment over the water to let the last drops slide back. He set it where he had found it.
A little farther on he saw the mark of a camp: ash under a turf turned back neatly, a line of small fish bones, a bit of cord frayed from use. He cut a new turf from where his heel had already scuffed the grass and laid it down over the old scar. He pressed it with his palm.
By evening he reached a stand of beeches where a shepherd had set a low bothy against a chalk bank with a roof of turf. No one was there. He went in and found the place clean: a pallet of bracken, a hook with a cracked cup, a small trench outside for fire. He left it so. He made his own fire not far away and kept it smaller than his hand. He ate bread and a few dried sloes from one pocket and one apple he had saved. It was tart. It took his mouth a moment to forgive it and then it was easy to eat.
He slept and woke and slept again. In the second waking he turned on his side and the staff rolled against his knuckles. He listened. Far off, a bell rang some number that meant nothing here; someone had hung it in a chapel where the count was right for them. The sound came thin across the land and died.
In the morning he set his scrip and his staff and drew his hood up. He stood still and looked east. The light lay in long bars on the land. A hare ran across a strip of open and stopped and looked toward him and then away and kept running. The air smelled of iron and damp grass and the faint smoke of a hearth he could not see.
He thought of the wall at the thorn, the culvert, the mill-gate, the plank over the coffin-stream, the spring with its clean throat, the hawthorn sprig tucked in stones, the woman at the ford with her slate disc, Leof’s oatcake pride, the reeve’s careful face when the water cleared, the boys with their grapnels waiting for instruction, the windlass grinding then running smooth.
He said, without moving his mouth, the fourth psalm of the mile:
Take only what you can carry without haste.
 Leave what you can mend.
 Let your steps be the same length in hunger and in plenty.
 Do not teach the land. Learn it.
Then he decided again, with the placing of his next foot, that it was time to go home.
He went on, borne away by the breadth of an old land and by the small work that keeps it together.


Chapter 2: Quarrelsome
From The Canticle of the Turning Road
He set no guard upon His hand; He stood between and the blow mislaid itself.
Then bread was cut in equal halves, and the beam stood level in the sight of all.
He taught the measure, and the people kept it.
 - collected fragment
Fair is blossom, brief its cheer;
Frost shall claim both leaf and spear.
Stream is swift, yet soon is dry;
So runs the world, and so pass I.
 - collected fragment
Morning came damp and gray, a hush pressed low upon the earth as though the heavens themselves had drawn close to listen. Drizzle drifted fine as spider-thread, beading on hedge and bramble, running in languid veins along the furrows where last season’s plough had bitten deep. The iron-shod end of Wanderer’s staff rang dully on a stone set fast in the path, then sank with muffled weight where mud lay thick, and each step seemed to measure not distance alone but the slow turning of the year.
The land about was a patchwork of fields, their stubble yellowing and bowed, veiled in pale mist that curled like incense from hollows and the edges of copses. Once-green meadows lay heavy now, grass turned sere and streaked with brown; and yet here and there the stubborn bloom of late clover flickered, a fading lantern against the encroaching long dark of winter. Hedge-rows, overgrown and tangled, bore the burnished fruit of autumn: rosehips red as coals, haws clustered thick, and sloes blue-black and bitter. From thorn and briar came the thin calls of birds, their songs no longer the full chorus of summer but solitary notes, plaintive as distant horns in a long-forgotten vale.
To the east the fields rose into gentle folds, where woodlands stood in their early autumn raiment. Oaks loomed vast and solemn, their crowns a tattered mantle of gold and russet, leaves drifting in lazy spirals, settling into heaps that whispered beneath the slow wind. Beeches blazed pale copper in the damp light, their smooth gray trunks darkened by the wet, while birches leaned like pale sentinels, shedding their yellow coins upon the earth. Beyond, darker still, pines and firs gathered on the ridge, their evergreen ranks stern and unyielding, as if sworn to guard against the encroaching chill.
Streams ran sluggish and swollen with the week’s rains, their banks softened and broken where cattle had come to drink. The water mirrored the sky, a moving sheet of gray, disturbed now and then by the leap of a trout or the dipping of a wagtail. Here, the air smelt of damp earth and wood-smoke, for in scattered farmsteads men had kindled their hearths early against the cold, and faint columns of smoke trailed upward, mingling with the fog until roof and cloud were one. The scent drifted far, bringing with it the sense of dwellings unseen, of lives folded close against the season.
As the day lengthened, the road wound between hedgerows and beneath dripping boughs, carrying Wanderer past orchards stripped of most fruit, save for a few apples clinging high and forlorn, bruised by rain and wind. The ground beneath lay littered with the fallen, sweet and rotting, and bees buzzed drowsily over them though their season was nearly done. Crows gathered in the stubbled fields, rising with a clap of wings when the traveler passed, only to settle once more, black flecks against the pale earth. The crows paused momentarily, gazing onto the solemn walker as moon to earth, bending their heads quizzically. It had been an age since last he had passed, this they knew.
Toward evening the light waned though the day was not yet old, for the clouds thickened and the drizzle deepened into rain. The countryside darkened, hues of bronze and dun seeping into every hedge and hollow, until all seemed cast in a single fading tone. Yet in that dimness there was a strange beauty: the sheen of wet bark glimmering, the sudden flame of a maple’s last leaves against the gloom, the hush of rain upon leaf and soil - a music as old as the hills.
The hush broke with men’s voices. Harsh words carried down the lane, ragged and close. He lengthened his stride and turned a bend where the hawthorn grew low.
Three men stood in the track. A youth lay in the mud with his face turned sideways and a dark line at the brow. The tallest, whose lip bore a narrow white scar, had his hands knotted into fists. The broadest shifted his weight and swore under his breath. The smallest hovered with his cloak clutched to his chest and his mouth working as if it wished to speak and dared not.
“He slipped,” the scarred man said at once, as though a charge had already been laid against him.
“He didn’t,” the smallest answered, the word dragged out by shame.
Wanderer came up and set his staff. He did not raise the staff or his voice. He said, “Enough.”
The broad man looked aside. The scarred one held for a heartbeat and then let his hands open.
“Lift him,” Wanderer said. “Not by the arms. Under shoulder and hip.”
The smallest moved first. Between them they raised the youth and set him under a hawthorn where the ground was driest. Wanderer knelt and drew a strip from the lining of his cloak. His hands were sure. He pressed the cloth against the cut and bound it with waxed thread from his scrip. The youth breathed fast and shallow. Wanderer steadied the head with the flat of his palm.
“Water,” he said.
The smallest man ran. The scarred one shifted as if to protest and then did not. When the smallest returned with a flask, Wanderer tipped a few drops at a time until the boy swallowed. The color came back slow as embers waking.
The youth’s eyes opened. He looked at Wanderer first, and his lips shaped a word that was thanks, though no sound came. Wanderer nodded once, as if to mark the fact and not count it.
“What was the quarrel?” he asked without turning his head.
“Bread,” said the smallest, low. “A toll at the next hamlet. He had a crust put by, and - ” He gestured helplessly. “We were hungry.”
The scarred man stared past them into the hedge. The broad one looked down at his boots and scraped the mud from one heel with the other.
“Share it now,” Wanderer said. “He eats first. You walk when he can walk. Not sooner.”
The smallest swallowed and bobbed his head. He loosened his cloak and tucked it tight around the youth. The other two gathered their bags with stiff movements. The scarred man muttered something to the broad one; they started on ahead without looking back.
Wanderer rose. The drizzle thickened and then eased again. He stood a moment with one hand on the hawthorn’s rough bark, as if to test whether it would hold a man’s weight, and then he went on.
A little way farther the lane widened. Ruts went shallow and then hard under his feet where many carts had passed. Smoke drifted flat above low roofs. A bell sounded once, not to call prayer but to mark the hour for trade. The hamlet had set its market cross by a green with a ditch around it, not for defense but to drain the wet. Boards had been laid for stalls, and a beam-scale hung beneath a thatched lean-to. A reeve in a patched cloak stood there with a book of names and a weight-stone on the table. His beard was neat and his eyes were narrow with care over trifles.
By the lean-to three measures lay out: a bushel basket, a peck, and a half-peck. A yardstick hung from a peg at the post. The wood had worm-holes and a tilt at one end; a line had been cut near that tilt and darkened with soot to look official.
The scarred man and the broad one stood before the beam-scale with their small sacks. The smallest had come up late, leading the youth, who walked under the cloak and kept a hand to his brow. The reeve watched them without moving his mouth.
“You’ll pay the market penny for passage,” he said. “And the toll for the road, for your cart left ruts in Michaelmas rain.”
“We carry no cart,” the scarred one said.
“Then two pennies for the rut you left with your boots,” the reeve answered, and the broad one barked a humorless laugh and choked it down.
“Show your loaf,” the reeve said to the broad man. “Bread pays weight here, and I mind it.”
The broad man set out his loaf. The reeve lay it on the scale and put up his stone. The beam did not move. He pushed the stone farther out along the arm and smiled thinly when the loaf began to lift as if it were too dear a thing to balance.
“That loaf is light,” he said. “It pays double.”
“It was heavy enough when I bought it,” the broad one muttered. The scarred man set his jaw and dug at his purse.
The smallest watched the yardstick. It was shorter than a yard by the span of a barleycorn. He stared as if that sliver of wood had become a snake.
“Hold,” Wanderer said. He did not shout. He stood with his staff held upright as if it were another post of the lean-to and looked at the reeve and the beam. “Fetch me the parish yard.”
“What have you to do with parish measures?” the reeve said, drawing himself up to the height of his dignity.
Wanderer looked at the bell rope. “Ring once,” he said to the smallest. “Ask the beadle for the parish yard and the dry weights.”
The smallest went, with a glance at the scarred one as if he expected to be dragged back. The scarred man said nothing. He watched the reeve. The reeve watched Wanderer.
Folk gathered by the sound. A baker with flour on his sleeves. A widow with a blue kerchief tied neat. Two girls with baskets. The beadle came with the parish yard on his shoulder like a pike and a wrapped parcel of weights. He looked from the reeve to Wanderer and said, “What’s this?”
“The yard there is short,” Wanderer said. “By the width of a barleycorn. The stone is light. We will see.”
The reeve sputtered. “You’ll not - ”
“We will see,” Wanderer said again, and the beadle set the parish yard upon the stall board with care. It was straight-grained ash, marked with nails at inch and foot, its ends banded in iron. The beadle laid the hamlet’s yard against it. The shortness showed in plain sight.
A murmur rose. The reeve’s lips thinned. “Wood swells and shrinks,” he said. “Winter warps a yard.”
“Then we true it,” Wanderer answered.        
He took the short yard in his hands, set it upon the table, and drew his knife. He trimmed the ragged end where worm had eaten, shaving until the wood lay flush with the parish mark. The slivers fell soft and pale. He smoothed the cut with his thumb, then took a sliver and drove it into a worm-hole with the tip of his knife, pegging the fraud where it could not creep.
“Mark it, beadle,” he said. The beadle struck the iron band lightly with a nail set, and the scratch lay bright.
Wanderer turned then to the beam. He knelt to the fulcrum and ran his thumb along the axle where the pin entered the post. The hole wore wide on one side. He cut a thin wedge from the stick he had just trimmed, seated it, and pressed the pin home again. The beam hung truer at once.
“Dry weights,” he said, and the beadle unwrapped the parish stones. They bore stamped crosses and numbers rubbed faint by use. Wanderer set the parish weight against the reeve’s stone on either side of the beam. The reeve’s lifted almost at once.
“It is light,” the widow said, her voice plain. “I thought so last week.”
“Stones are stones,” the reeve said, but softer now, as men speak to themselves to make a thing less than it is.
Wanderer looked at the baker. “Your loaf,” he said.
The baker set a round of bread upon the scale. Wanderer set the parish stone opposite. The beam wavered and settled level, as if easing into a chair after a day’s work. He slid the reeve’s stone into place and the beam tipped like a spent axle.
“The stones are wrong,” the smallest said, surprised by his own boldness.
“They are light,” the beadle said, and he looked at the reeve with a patience gone thin as paper.
The scarred man’s jaw unclenched a little. The broad one let out a breath he had been holding. The youth under the cloak leaned into the stall post and watched.
Wanderer did not speak against the reeve. He did not need to. He took up the baker’s loaf and set it in the scarred man’s hands.
“Pay the penny,” he said. “And no more. The road toll you owe for the churchyard stones you will carry after dinner. Two loads. The wall at the east end leans.”
A few laughed, and then checked themselves, and then laughed again because the laugh had done no harm. The reeve’s face worked, but he did not refuse. He took the penny and wrote a mark. It was the only thing he could do that did not cut himself more deeply.
“Widow,” Wanderer said, and the woman in the blue kerchief stood straighter at the name she had not given him. “Weigh your loaf. If it is light, say so.”
She set it upon the beam. The parish stone met it. Balance came true. She nodded, simple and satisfied, and wrapped it again. Measure for measure, the road keeps its due.
Wanderer stepped back. He had come forward when there was work and now there was none. Rain ticked on the thatch over the lean-to. The crowd thinned, as crowds will when no one pushes them to stay. The beadle took up the parish yard and the weights and went, with a last look at the reeve that was neither cruel nor kind, only clear.
The scarred man stood with the loaf in his hands and an effort in his face like a man learning a new way to stand. He half bowed, awkward and stiff. The broad one, who had not the same trouble with words, said, “Thank you,” and flushed as if he had given away a coin too quickly. The smallest looked as if he might say too much and so said nothing, which was well.
“Eat,” Wanderer said. “All of you. Then carry the stones for the east wall.”
They sat at the edge of the green under the drip of a hedge and divided the loaf into three equal pieces, then broke the scarred man’s piece again and pushed the fourth to the youth without looking at him. The youth ate as one does after a fright: careful, grateful, intent.
Wanderer stood a little apart and warmed his hands under his cloak. He had not eaten since dawn. The baker, wiping his palms on his apron, came and pressed a heel of bread into his hand.
“Take it,” he said. “You kept me from being counted light.”
Wanderer took the heel and did not refuse the kindness. The bread was heavy and smelled of malt. He ate slow. Steam rose from his cloak where the rain met body heat and had to choose between the two.
When the bread was gone and the men had gone to their stones, Wanderer stepped out of the drip into the lee of the smithy. He sat on a low block and unlaced his hose. He wrung them clean and set them across the block to steam. He pressed his thumb along the arch of his foot until the cramp eased and the warmth returned. He coughed once, not from sickness but because damp settles even in a sound chest. He put his hose back on and tied the strings with square knots that would come loose when needed.
The smallest came to him with an oatcake wrapped in cloth and a kerchief that had seen better days but was dry. He stood as a boy stands before a master, straight and anxious.
“Take,” he said, holding them out. “For the road.”
Wanderer folded the kerchief into his scrip. He turned the oatcake in his hand and then gave it back.
“Keep it,” he said. “Eat first. Shame works poorly on an empty belly.”
The smallest hesitated, then obeyed. He bit, chewed, and swallowed, color coming up in his face like heat near a forge.
“How do I keep the rope from creeping on the load?” he asked, sudden, as if the question had been waiting for a place to settle.
Wanderer took the cord from the smallest’s belt. He looped, turned, and tucked.
“Bend-knot,” he said. “The pull tightens it. The slack lets it go. See?” He pulled and the knot bit. He lifted the tail and the knot eased. He put the cord back into the smallest’s hands and watched him tie it twice.
“Good,” he said.
From the nave of the little church the bell spoke, thin but true. It had rung flat that morning. Now the tone sat cleaner. Perhaps the clapper-seat had been cleaned in the last rain. Perhaps not. It was a sound you could set your foot to.
By afternoon the sky lightened and the wind turned. The three men trudged past with stones on a barrow toward the east wall. The youth walked with them and did not stumble. The reeve took no notice. Wanderer moved from the smithy’s lee and passed the lean-to. The reeve stood by the beam with his book and did not look up. The beam hung level in the still air like a thing that had found its right place and meant to keep it.
Wanderer walked out of the hamlet by the lane that rose to the common and then went faint over sandy ground. He touched the parish yard with two fingers as he passed the beadle, who had set it upon pegs in the porch. He names things with his hands when he cannot keep them with his tongue.


The day drew down. He took his way along a ridge where wind went clean and the land dropped away on either side. Sheep moved like stones that had learned to graze. A shepherd came up from a hollow with a crook in his hand and a collie at his heel.
“Evening,” the shepherd said. He was young, with a weathered face that would stay young for years. “You’re the one set the scale right.”
“I set it fair,” Wanderer said.
The shepherd looked east. “The kine down by the bracken steps have gone restless at night,” he said. “They don’t like it there. They stare at the hill and blow. It’s the old way, under the fern. There’s a taste to the air. I’d not sleep near it.”
“Thank you,” Wanderer said.
The shepherd nodded and went on. The collie gave Wanderer a single short look as if marking him on a list, then followed. The ridge smelled of iron and sour grass and the faint sweetness of gorse gone to seed.
He came by a coffin-path where two flat stones bridged a runlet. He put his staff down and tested the near stone and then the far one. Both held. He trimmed a thorn with his knife where a pall might catch and flicked it aside. When light failed, he set himself in the lee of a cart-shed whose wall stood a handbreadth off plumb but meant to keep standing until spring. He built a fire no larger than his two hands cupped together and fed it hedgerow sticks, laid crosswise and then lengthwise, until it kept its own counsel. He ate the last crust the baker had given him and drank from his flask. He rested his back against the shed’s warm timber and let his head fall for a little while.
Out in the dark, a cart passed on the road with its wheel-bands ringing faint - iron against stone, iron against stone, iron against stone - until the sound fell away. An owl called twice and then was done.
He slept. In the second watch he woke because he always did. The shed ticked as its heat left it. The stars had come out clean between a ragged scud of cloud. He breathed and his breath showed. He did not look for signs in it.
At dawn he rose, shook the ash from his cloak, and set his scrip. He stood a long moment, as he often did, before his first step. He looked east. The ridge lay bare. In the far hollow, a dark stain of fern held the place the shepherd had named. The day would take him there.
He touched the staff’s iron shoe to the hard ground and felt how the ground answered. Then he decided again, with no word and with nothing but the placing of his foot, that it was time to go home. And he went on, borne away by the broad old land and by the small work that keeps it together.
Chapter 3: Somewhere in the Singing Darkness
From “The Canticle of the Turning Road”
He did not kindle blaze against the night; he counted breaths and kept them even.
When song forgot its measure, he stood and let the silence find its pitch.
He went down, and the steps remembered how to carry weight.
Rain had passed before dawn, and its ghost kept to the hedges - the clean wet of bark and soil rising like a benediction from the furrows. The smell was deep and simple: petrichor in the ruts, peat-smoke from low chimneys, wool drying behind doors. Autumn lay everywhere, not as a pageant but as a quiet insistence; leaves turned and let go without declaring it. Wanderer walked while the light widened by degrees. His staff said little to the path, iron to stone, iron to earth, in a rhythm that neither hurried nor lagged. The little lanes took him between close fields where stooks stood like patient monks and rooks worked the gleanings with black, clever care. He passed lychgates furred with lichen the color of old coins; he drank at a horse-trough where the oak leaves had tiled themselves into a floating roof; he went by cider-presses under open sheds where the air was full of sweet bruised apple and wasp-song grown lazy with the cold. At evening in such places the world smelled of mash and hearths and wet leather hanging to dry; at morning it was frost-silvered thatch, a new rim of ice in the bucket, and the thin gossip of wrens in hawthorn.
Where the ridge shouldered up, the land changed its speech. Beech-woods stood with their floors copper-deep, and the trunks, smooth as river-worn stone, lifted a pale colonnade into the gray. In the dim beneath, mushrooms rode up overnight like a quiet army: parasol and penny-bun and a brittle brood of inkcaps that would not wait for anyone. Squirrels hauled beech-mast in mouthfuls and forgot half of it at once, which is one way trees travel. Deer had scored the soft bark higher than a man’s hand could reach; at dusk the low cough of stags came out of the hollows and went back in. He saw no antlers, only the lurch of shadow as they moved. The wind here had a leaf-taste to it. When it rose, it sifted the forest in invisible combs; when it fell, it left the world listening to itself.
He came out on chalk where the turf thinned to a pelt over bone. The downs ran broad and clean-backed, scarp and dip repeating like a measured breath. Old causeways kept to their straightness with a stubborn pride; the rain glazed them and they shone like narrow rivers running uphill. Below, in the coombes, sheep moved as if they had learned the country by heart and were reciting it a mouthful at a time. A white horse cut into a far slope lay long and lean as a drawn blade, its chalk showing through wet grass with a light that was not the sky’s. On days when the wind went clear from the north, he could taste iron and a far cold in it; when it turned south it brought spice-rot from last year’s fern and the harbor-reek of tar where boats sat up on skids.
Low places gathered him next. Water spread thin as glass over meadows and let the sky lie down there. Reeds stitched the margins, red-dog and bulrush and a brown-stemmed kind that hissed when the breeze went through it. The eel-traps were pegged in rakes along the backwaters; he saw hands empty them at dawn, quick and practiced, and a girl laugh when a mud-slicked thing slipped the wrong way and had to be chivvied in with a stick. Wild geese wrote their long lesson overhead and read it back to one another on the marsh with a clamor that sounded like argument and was only endurance. The salt came up with the tide and left its taste when it fell back; mud took a print and kept it for a whole day as if accounts were being balanced between the river and the sea. He went by a withy-bed where men had cut rods and stood them to season; the whole place smelled of green sap and wet bark. Once at dusk, an otter crossed ahead of him with a fish half its own length, glanced once as a craftsman does at a stranger’s workbench, and was gone. Perhaps again one day he would need to pass by Ailteril and its people, there was a tension finding itself here.
He walked through hamlets that had already drawn themselves tighter for the cold: shutters mended; hinges greased; nets hung like gray cobwebs in the lee of walls; lanes swept not for pride but to keep the ruts from pooling into habit. A traveling singer’s cart went by, bells muted with cloth; a peddler shouldered a box that had its own lacquered shine of use; a friar with a torn sleeve took the ditch’s high side and gave him the low with a nod. Under village eaves strings of onions turned slow and dried; on green hooks, hams darkened to a winter patience. He slept sometimes in barns with the mice and sometimes under hedges where the stars came like hoarfrost close enough to breathe upon. When the night ran with thin rain he found the lee of a chalk bank, cut a turf carefully, and put it back in the morning so the scar would not learn to spread.
The road found a valley where mills sat and would sit whether men wished it or not. He watched one wheel turn its black arcs through a rain so fine it was more a thickness in the air than drops; he watched another stand idle, pond glassed and untroubled, for the miller’s boy had fallen sick and the gate was bound up with a strap to keep it from wandering with the wind. He said nothing to either. He took his bread where a woman set it in his hand and did not ask his name because the day’s work had already taken it. He left a string on a broken latch because it asked so little to be useful again. At a crossroads where four parishes touched and shook hands, the signpost leaned. He leaned, too, until the shoulder-square bit and the post considered and consented. Away to Redpeak that sign read. A rook on the nearest ash watched with the precise disapproval of a clerk who keeps correct hours.
He walked by quarries where the chalk was bitten raw; he crossed strips of heath newly fired to freshen the ling, and the ground there was bitter and clean together, a scent like struck flint and rain. He stepped over the black threads of charcoal burns weeks gone cold, their circles roofed with turf that had learned to lie as if it had never been moved. Along one old hedge he found stones that had once stood up to make a thought; now they lay down and made a boundary instead. On another day he took the high of a sea-cliff, wave-voices rising even without storm, and watched cormorants dry their wings as if warming black gloves over a stove. The path there was narrow between gorse and sky; he set his steps to the true side and did not look down where shell-sand lifted and fell like breathing.
When nights were clean the whole vault came near. Stars pricked without twinkling in the hard frost; The heavens lay like a spill of sifted flour across a dark board; meteors stitched in a hurry. He knew the wheeling as a mason knows his string-line. He woke in the second watch because he always did and listened for whatever the world had chosen to say that hour: a fox’s bark like a nail struck wrong; owls making their solemn trade; once, from far away where a chapel would be, a bell given a single friendly hand out of habit.
He came to a town with a market that had moved indoors for the weather. Tallow made a bright stench in the close air; coarse cloth hung in folds thick as winter; a cooper beat iron hoops with a hollow song that got into the bones and built a barrel there. He did not stay. Beyond it, an old dyke ran soundless between thorns older than any roof; wind played long notes on its line. A track of pack-ponies had printed the clay, and the prints had held and taken frost; he put his boots in them where they were true. In a hollow where alder crowded the water and the path forgot itself twice, he found the cut of a ford by its stones’ old habit of lying level. He went by without testing them; sometimes the memory of a place is more useful left whole.
So, step by step, the high country opened. The heather stood up to his knees and then only to his boot; the turf thinned and the weather’s hand lay plain upon the ground. The wind lived here. It combed the slope in long unbroken strokes, lifting the sere grasses until they showed the pale undersides like fish turning near the surface. Pebbles rolled with the lightest pass of it and made their rain-sounds without rain. On days without sun, the world held its light evenly, as if a white cloth had been stretched from horizon to horizon and the ground were reading by it.
Far off, on a shoulder of the moor, something stood that had once been more than stones. Roof was gone, but the angles remained; a low wall kept the line of an aisle, and a black mouth opened into the hill as if the structure had drawn breath once and never let it fully go. Ravens had left their blue-black gloss on the coping stones; sheep had scraped the corners smooth where salt gathered after mist. A nettle grew tall in the lee, one survivor with its seeds hung like a small curtain of beads against the air.
He crossed toward it by the drier ways, reading ground as he always did: here the peat’s skin held; there the brown gloss meant a sunk boot to the ankle; here the buried stone promised a true step. The bog gave back the sky in broken panes; his shadow went before him when the cloud thinned and drew back when it thickened again. Once the wind laid flat, and he could hear the faintest mutter of water under turf, the old run of a cut forgotten by men and remembered by the hill. When he reached the ruin he put his hand to the remaining jamb. It was slick with damp and wore a thin fur of moss and smoke. Under his palm the cut of a spiral lay faint, like a thought remembered after a long labor. Above the doorway a beam-stone had been set long ago with shallow marks at equal spaces, not letters, not numbers - just honest notches, a yard that could be trusted by any hand. He stood with his weight easy and learned the doorway the way he learns a road: by the quiet it keeps. Then he stepped inside.
Within, the old nave kept its shape by habit. A bench lay collapsed into itself. A kneeler had turned to dark pulp and retained the bend of knees that had pressed it for years. On the wall a place of paint survived beneath the wash of time: an open hand no longer whole, its lines softened, its weight still unmistakably set to lift and set, not to strike. Stubs of candles made a rough arch along a low shelf, the wax run and cooled in tears that looked like a field of pale fungi after rain. The ruin had stored the scents it had been given: tallow long spent, damp lime, the sharp mineral of old ash, the intimate stale of blankets once folded for the poor and taken away again wet and warm. Love had lived here, love that baked loaves and wiped noses and set pegs back when they worked loose. It had not been eloquent. It had left behind only what eloquence always loses first - the practical things.
He went to the mouth in the floor where steps twisted down. The first was sound, the second hummed under his boot as if hollow, the third held. He took them by their patience, one upon the other, and the light followed a little way as if curious but not bold. Below, the air turned close and old. Water made a fine thread somewhere, like a woman’s hair drawn through a ring. The smell sharpened: wet stone; peat pressed long and leaking its brown tea into a sump; the clean iron of earth too long without sun; tallow that would never burn again.
Candles woke, though he had not touched them. Not flame; not that. But the stubs gave back their cold memory of flame so faithfully that the crypt brightened as a room does when people come in and speak low with affection. Shadows thickened not where light failed but where it remembered failing and kept doing so out of habit. The singing began in the edges of hearing: a lullaby that had no words left to it, only the hum mothers make when they are too tired to hold a tune and yet will not lay the child down until the breath evens.
Wanderer stood and did not lift his staff. He put it softly to the stone, and the stone replied the way a table does when a carpenter sets his palm upon it to judge if the legs have settled. The song crept along the walls and folded upon itself, turning corners it had learned from centuries of plainchant and rain. It wished to be comfort and could not remember how; in forgetting, it had become hunger that imitated comfort. It smelled like blankets stored in a chest for a wedding that never came, like peat cut and stacked and never fetched in from the weather, like candles promised to a saint and lit only in the mind and not at the wick.
“Not near,” he said, very quietly, as one speaks to a nervous animal that will bolt if named too loudly. His breath made no plume in that air. The darkness gathered itself by inches. It did not move as smoke moves or water, but as recollection does when it is suddenly all of a piece: your mother’s hands on the winter quilt; the sound of a gate you mended years ago; the exact weight of a child asleep and trustful on your shoulder; the smell of hot bread wrapped in cloth. It came forward with those shapes in it, and each shape hurt.
At the far end of the crypt a slab had slipped. Its face bore the faint ghost of spirals, and on the edge someone had carved a measure: notches true at finger, palm, span. The ground there was wrong. The fine thread of water did not run; it searched. It had been denied its fall by a small cruelty of chance - stone shifted by frost, a peg worked loose, a board rotted in the unseen. Where water is kept from its way, it does not shout; it breeds a silence that grows heavy enough to sing. In that singing the thing had learned itself.
Wanderer crouched and ran his fingertips along the edge of the slab. Under it, a lip had once caught the neighbor stone. It had slipped inside, biting the channel and stopping the run. He set his shoulder - not hard, not as one wrestles, but in the manner of a man who knows how much pressure a thing can bear and how much it needs to remember itself. The slab answered by a finger’s breadth. The hum rose and thinned, as if the singer had been woken too quickly and now lay between sleep and grief.
“Hush,” he said, and the word fell into the place like a peg. He eased the slab again, using the staff’s iron to find purchase, and found the old lip. He did not ask for help. Help was here already: the weight of the hill, the good stubbornness of stone, the way water never forgets downhill even when men do. He set the slab to its seat; it took and held. The thread found itself; it ran, the tiniest drop of music made honest. The candles’ cold memories dimmed by a shade and then steadied.
The darkness stood. It had no figure and yet it wore many. At one moment it bore the shape of a quilt pulled up under a chin; at the next it seemed a row of pegs with shawls hung neatly; then it was a pew rubbed by generations of hands; then only the smell of rain after dust and the way the first step into a house turns a man’s shoulders to fit the door. It did not hate. It did not love in any way that knew where to stop. It wanted him kept - well-kept, as blankets are, folded and laid with lavender, to be taken out only when nights were bitter and someone remembered the right song.
“No,” he said, and in the saying there was neither anger nor pity, only the plainness with which you tell a wall it is out of line. “You may keep what was given to you and no more.”
The hum thickened like a throat closing on weeping. Wax at the rim of a stub softened without heat and slumped. A smell like wet wool rose until the breath faltered. He set his palm to the broken lip of the shelf where the stubs stood, and it wobbled under his hand. He took from his scrip two small pegs of oak that he had shaved and saved for no reason he could have said at dawn. He set them, tapped with the round of his staff, and the shelf lay true. The stubs listed forward and then settled as if a sleeping child had turned to a better angle and stopped grumbling.
Something like wind went through the crypt and yet the dust did not lift. It was the motion memories make when their edges are smoothed by a hand that knows where the snag lies. He went to the sump and cleared it with a few square cuts of turf, lifting out the clot that had kept the water from consenting to be small. He folded a piece of fallen linen he found half-rotted by the steps and laid it where hands would reach it when the first winter rain drove a pilgrim under. He straightened a nail that had stood proud in the doorframe and would have told a story against the next passerby’s cloak. He did not bless anything. He put things where they belonged until their silence felt like the inside of a held breath that is not fear.
The singing changed. It did not cease. It went low and even, the way a mother hums not to cause sleep but because the child is already asleep and the humming is for herself. The darkness shrank to its right size - the exact size of a room made to be kind when the weather goes bad. It did not reach for him. It remembered its walls. In the corner where mortar had failed and a little daylight leaked like milk, he saw the faintest scratch of lettering where someone’s thumb had steadied the chisel: Keep the narrow things. Hold them sound. The words were too worn to read unless you had known them already.
He stood in that and let his own breath count the space: how many steps from slab to shelf; how many from shelf to stair; the length of the staff against the angle of the door. He found it all sufficient. When he turned to go the candles did not try to light. They kept their memory close, as they should. The scent of peat was still there, but in its proper corner; the blankets’ ghost lay folded; love, which does not thrive in confinement, seemed to have left a note on the threshold and gone out to see about the neighbors.
On the stair he paused and touched the second step that had hummed. Its under-edge had been eaten thin. He slipped a thin wedge where it would bite and not show and pressed it home with two fingers. The tone ceased. Steps forget, too, when no one corrects them; then they remember all at once if reminded properly. At the ruin’s door he set his palm again to the jamb and felt the faint warmth his own hand gave back to him. He let it go.
Outside, the day had come on without brilliance. Cloud lay high and even, and the light under it was like linen pulled over a window to make the room gentle. From the moor a grouse drummed and then fell quiet. Far off, from a fold where he could not see it, a bell spoke a single clean note that did not argue with distance. He stood a moment and listened to the world being sufficient to itself. He did not take the candles. He did not set any new ones. He left the crypt with its kept darkness and its true water and its shelf that would not wobble until well after winter.
He crossed the moor by a line of stones set so long ago that no one had asked them to be handsome, only honest. Rain began again, very small - the sort of rain that makes the heather smell like old honey and the peat breathe up its long-held stories. The wind turned and brought him the faintest trace of hearths - the domestic industry of love: a blanket slapped once against a doorpost to shake the ash out; a kettle set down with more care than a soldier gives a sword; someone humming for no one in particular. He let it pass through him and leave no hooks.
At the edge of the heather, where the path fell toward lower fields and their stonework stitches, he said the fifth psalm of the mile without opening his mouth:
When you go down, go down by the steps that hold.
        Leave the water a way to run.
        Do not hoard warmth; lend it, and it returns by other doors.
He went on. The ruin would keep. The darkness would sing when it must and hush when the weather improved. Below, a shepherd’s bothy smoked thinly, and a cart track held its puddles like small mirrors laying the sky flat at a man’s feet. Near noon, when shadows sleep, his shadow went a little east. He decided again, with nothing said and nothing sworn, that it was time to go home. And the land, oh the land, it was crying. And he went on, borne away by the stones of old underfoot and with the burden of memory atop his shoulders.
Chapter 4: 
I shall not yield to death in shameful plight;
But strive to forge a deed that all might praise.
Reveal the gloom; unmask the mortal night,
Ten thousand wicked devils march and sway
Here now the creeping dark knocks at my door,
Content with siege engine and trebuchet
For all who roam upon this fragile floor
Must stand, unbowed, and strive with all their might.
Let him who dares seize glory ere he falls;
Nor let the sands of fate drift on in vain;
By steadfast will, secure the laurel crown,
And carve a lasting name where hopes remain.
Thus shall my voice defy the hush of death,
And sing of hope triumphant with each breath.
- General Isonendros Vex, spoken at the most dire hour of Redpeaks defense
Set no toll upon the King’s stone; a bridge keeps or fails by how it was first laid, and the river collects all debts in its season.
 - Master Osric’s Field-Book of Bridges and Fords, folio XIII
The day leaned toward evening as a man leans upon a gate, unhurried, content to watch the light go its slow way across fallow and hedge. The lane ran beneath ash and hawthorn, their last leaves hanging like spent coins after market - dull gold, thin copper - trembling whenever the faintest wind remembered them. The fields were in their second silence: the first had been reaping, with cries and the hiss of straw; this was the silence after sweeping and stacking, when the earth draws breath beneath stubble and clod and seems to smile a little under its furrows. Far off, the downs held the sky in a long patient back, grey-green and grave; in the low places the river showed here and there like a strip of hammered silver half-rolled back into its cloth. Winter had not begun; yet it had put its finger to windows, and there were small glitterings in ditch and dell that were neither dew nor frost, but the whisper between them.
The Wanderer went before as he always went, not so much walking as agreeing with the land about the matter of distance. His staff gave a soft iron note upon stone, lessened to a hush over earth, then touched a root and took from it a little woody sound that pleased him. He had about him that unaccountable ease which is neither youth nor age, but something kept - like a good edge, tended through seasons; and the air, which is sharp with most men in late autumn, seemed to lay itself down around him as if content.
Behind him came a horse the colour of rain on slate, with a mane that remembered river spray, and upon it a young man who would have ridden well in any court because he rode as he had been taught by a field. His cloak had taken the road’s dust without apology; his helm was slung and shone as things shine that are cleaned by hands proud of their work. About his throat the clasp bore three small peaks picked out in red enamel under a sword-point: a modest sign of a great name. His face had the frank eagerness of a hound that has been too long kept to heel; yet if you looked past that brightness you saw how the jaw would set once matters ceased to be play. His whole body answered to the name he spoke as if to a challenge.
“Isonondros Vex,” he called lightly, reining to the Wanderer’s side; then, with that fine courtesy which belongs to houses as much as to men, “Iso, for a friend. Son to Vex the Elder who stood at Redpeak and did not give the city so easily.”
“I remember the weather,” said the Wanderer. “North wind. Ash in the snow. Your father fretted more for a torn hem in his cloak than for the hole in his thigh.”
Iso laughed outright; it was the clear laugh of a lad whose heart leaps before him and yet does not stumble. “By the Peaks, so he did! You were there, then.”
“I was at hand, as was certain… less credible speakers” said the Wanderer, and after a little while, because he was fond of accuracy in all made things including speech, “They made more of it than there was, and less than there needed.”
Iso’s eyes shone. He turned, as men turn in mind as well as in body toward remembered walls and a plain mantled in white. For a few breaths he rode in that other place where trumpets are not thin brass but wind inside the ribs. Then he tossed his head a little, as a colt does at a fly and at his own foolishness. “If you were at hand there, be glad that I am now. I have set myself to keep with you - to make straight the path before you where rough hands and worse manners may wish you harm. A staff is a poor answer to a blade.”
“Is it,” the Wanderer murmured, but as one who notes a weather-sign without quarrel. “Keep the thought. Thoughts so kept are sometimes useful to their owners.”
Iso took that for consent - he had the young man’s gift of treating doorways as invitations - and swung down to walk his grey and spare it. They went so a long furlong, and the world in that space gave itself kindly to eyes and ear: a robin ticking from a thorn; sheep single-file on a ridge like notches on a spine; smoke lifting straight from a byre where someone had laid a good fire and banked it; late geese in a crooked line, practicing with the evening as if with a bow. The river spoke quietly in its lower voice, that of pools and undercuts; the higher note of rip-rap and shallows was for another reach. Somewhere a child called “home” to no one in particular and was obeyed by two dogs and, grudgingly, by the child.
Iso spoke as a man will when the road and the companion both draw a tongue from its sheath: of Redpeak, of the old general’s one-tooth smile when unobserved, of boys who played breach in winter and learned how long cold feels upon an ungloved palm. He told smaller tales without shame: how a lance slipped from his grasp at a tilt and made a clatter indecent for a prince’s field; how a letter from a lady was read into silence by being read too often; how a jest outran wisdom to just within the prince’s hearing and then limped back poor and sorry. He told them lightly, but underneath the lightness was that lean hunger by which wolves travel thin winter miles - the wish to be measured and found sound, to have one’s length set to a true yard and not a trader’s.
The Wanderer let the words pass as riverlets, hearing their temperature and fall, netting one or two with a small remark as a man might take a trout and admire it for its shine and then let it go again. “He smiled so at a blacksmith’s christening,” he said, to Iso’s mention of the one-tooth look. “It is the look of a man at peace with a silence that is not empty.”
They came then to a pinch in the land where the road climbed a little shelf and became a causeway over reeds and wet meadow. A bridge of three arches crouched there, old and low and close to its own reflection, its stones the colour of bread crust and old bone. From its parapet, moss drooped like frayed velvet; on one coping a wagtail wagged and set its small white bib to rights. The light, which had been all afternoon a mild and faithful companion, began to turn away, leaving its interest here and there in the world like coins on ledges.
On the causeway a man sat with an ankle upon his knee, making a picture and knowing it. His hat had been pinched to an angle just shy of impertinence. His coat was good cloth taught bad habits: the cut town-made, the alterations road-won. He had a blade upon his lap - slender, with a guard like a petal folded back upon itself, bright with loving care. Behind him, three others stood or lounged, each keeping the insolent casualness of men hired to be obstacle and paid not to think more than a cudgel thinks.
“Halt there,” said the seated man, with a courtesy polished thin by use. “A toll for the bridge, by the order of the Brotherhood of the Road; or if you prefer, by consent of gentlemen. We have scales for cattle, rates for carts, a fee for bright helms, and a levy upon reputations.”
Iso’s chin came up by instinct, as a banner lifts to a draught. “This bridge,” he answered with a very decent calm, “was set in my grandsire’s day out of the common store by the King’s masons. No toll has ever been charged by private hand here since the old winter, and none will be.”
The man bowed in the saddle of his thigh; he had a smile neat enough to lay with dividers. “Law is a coat, young sir. It keeps off the rain until someone borrows it. But the evening is soft. We need not quarrel with the bareness of things. You may pay in coin - or in kind. I am called Faber, once of Stonemarket. I propose a pass-of-arms for the pleasure of travellers, first blood to honor, yield to courtesy. A purse for your pains and the right of way for three, if you prove the better.”
Iso laughed softly, and his laugh took twenty winters off the world and laid them by the hedge. “First blood to honor, then. I am Isonondros Vex.”
Faber’s eyelids showed a little more white; the name rang in him and found a bell from an older steeple. “I have heard of Vex,” he said, too careless now in his care. “He is old. His son I have not heard. Names go.”
“I will see this one kept stout,” Iso answered, and with a deft motion cast aside his cloak and slipped the frog-latch from his sword-hilt.
The Wanderer sat down upon the low parapet where the stone had stored a thread of the day. He set his staff within easy reach, but rather as a man sets aside a tool to rest than as one preparing to take it again. He looked upon the river’s run under the middle arch. The wagtail bowed and bowed as if praying for gnats.
Faber rose with a stagecraft learned under eaves and in alleys. He uncoiled and stood long and slant, the right foot forward but not overmuch, the left knee soft, the hips a little square. His blade he took in a grip close to the shells, thumb low, fingers alive. He brought the point to line, true and without jig. He shifted his weight. It was the carriage of a rapier-man who had eaten his bread watching men die of inches.
Iso drew a sword plainer and older-minded, an arming blade broad at the root and gently narrowing to a sober point, with a shallow groove running two-thirds of its length to lighten the steel without weakening it. Its edges were not razor-thin like a barber’s toy, but carried the modest swell of good work - convex and patient - so that they would bite and yet endure. The guard was straight and a little down-turned at the tips, forged thick where hand meets hazard, bearing the small hammer-marks of a smith who signed with craft rather than flourish. The grip was bound in oxblood leather over cord, risen in two low ribs beneath the palm so the hand would always know its place; at the heel sat a wheel-pommel, bright from long handling, with a faint circle nicked into its face where a ring had struck it in some old hurry. Near the base of the blade, no larger than a barley-grain, a maker’s sign lay: three reeds beside a tiny star, the emblem of a riverside forge not far off Redpeak.
The scabbard was of plain wood covered in dark hide, rain-swollen at the throat from many miles and many weathers, its chape of dull brass dented once and neatly straightened. A narrow strap, well-oiled, took the weight without complaint, and when the sword came free the air remembered the smell of clove and tallow. It was no courtling’s ornament, no duelist’s reed; it weighed what a right blade should - neither heavy in vanity nor light in deceit - and it balanced a hand’s breadth before the guard, eager to begin, willing to be checked. Along the true edge you might see, if the light were honest, the small, bright scallops where labor had met labor: nicks peened out and whetted down, each a lesson kept. This was a house blade, meant for winters and walls, for field and ford: a companion that would not chatter, a servant that would not sulk, and when called upon, a witness that spoke plainly and was believed.
 He came first to a roof-guard, the blade raised near the shoulder and slightly forward, elbows free; then, remembering his tutor’s hand on the spine, he eased to longpoint - arms extended but not locked, point ruling the center, the hilt alike near and far. His feet found the old angles without show. He took in measure - how far a man may strike with his length and his lunge - and set it not at Faber’s preference but at his own.
Faber made the opening courtesy with his blade: a small circle, wrist steady, shoulder still, to let the point show its liveliness. Iso answered with stillness. The first play was of eyes and hands: invitations and refusals, a drift of the point to ask, a slight drift to answer. Faber offered a low line - foot, shin, the rude temptation; Iso did not nibble. Faber drew his left shoulder a finger-breadth to false a disengage, then, with a quick cavazione, slipped the steel under Iso’s line to find the inside; Iso carried the threat with a small rotation at the wrists - nothing gross in arm or shoulder - bringing strong against weak at the bind and feeling the truth of pressure through the quillons into bone. The metal spoke, thin and silver.
“Mind the winning edge,” the Wanderer said quietly to the water. “He will try your near shoulder from the outside after you stretch him on the low line - south-county habit.”
Faber probed with a feint to thigh, turned to the shoulder as foretold, a thrust with a slight angulation, wrist deviating, elbow contained; Iso met the line with a high winding, taking the blade into his strong and, without over-pursuit, letting it slide off to his right while stepping a half-pace offline with his rear foot to steal the measure. His point kissed air where Faber had been; not a cut yet, but a reminder that steel remembers.
The evening narrowed. On the bank a cow paused mid-chew with interest rarely seen in cattle. A rook hurled one coarse comment and then grew polite. Faber drew a breath that made a sound through the nose and smiled again, but with less geometry. He changed his guard to a more vertical wrist, knuckles high, line closed on the outside, and tested; Iso replied by lowering the hilt so the longpoint leveled a thumb’s breadth below Faber’s blade, the quillons ready to beat or wind. Faber began the dance that men of the rapier love: feint-disengage-feint, the small deceits that teach a point to walk through a door. He took the inside; Iso yielded, gathered, found the outside with a short beat from the wrist, then glided forward as a ploughshare goes - no lunge, only pressure. Faber felt the weight and gave way lest the bind turn into his hand; he slipped the point down, looking for an underhand stab to the belly. Iso folded the front knee, brought the hilt down, and the flat met the low line, a true under-blow, without exposing the crown.
Now Faber grew more serious. He took measure again with a small advance of the rear foot, right heel kissing the ground, then a shallow lunge - knee over toe, hips aligned, back leg straight - the point seeking a shoulder seam. Iso’s counter-time was not a heroic thing, merely a well-timed thing: as the thrust came into the weak of his blade, he beat to the outside and cut short to the head with a short over-hew turned with the wrists, not the shoulder, his elbow tight to keep speed. The cut did not bite deep - the man wore a hat chosen not only for fashion - but it nicked above the ear where hats end being helmets. A thin line of red welled. Faber’s eyes flashed, partly with pain, partly with admiration that such a proper country cut had been delivered in such tidy measure.
He laughed a little then, and lunged in earnest. This time his left hand lifted a finger’s breadth - men who fence for show do such things; men who fence for bread never do - and the point ran straight as rain on slate toward Iso’s right breast. Iso took the thrust with a displacement and a traverse - stepping his left foot a half-pace to his own left while turning the hips so that the line glanced past - and, in the same beat, he let the short edge find Faber’s sword-hand across the knuckles, a quick draw-cut from contact that blades learn faster than men. Blood sprang in red beads and then ran.
“First blood to honor,” Iso said, lowering the point by a hand’s breadth as they had agreed, his breath flowing out in a winter plume. His cheeks were high with colour, his eye bright but not wild. A man could see he had been taught to wait when he must, and to go when he might.
Faber stepped back, opened and closed his hand, and considered, as craftsmen do, the work and the worker. He bowed with only a little of the old insolence left in the hinge. “To honor,” he said. He turned as if to sheathe, and with a flourish that would have earned a cheer from a tavern’s loft, he cast down his hat instead and came on with a final thrust drawn from spite and art together, a quick, low line, no feint, no talk, the point looking for the soft below the ribs.
It is a poor habit and an old one, the last-stroke treachery of men who have lived by flourish, but it is common upon bridges. Iso had not dropped his guard to the floor of the world. The blade came up like a gate, took the rapier with the strong just below the midpoint, and without heat he bound it, slid, and let the rapier’s tip whistle past his right flank while his own point, carried by that same rotation, settled into the meat of Faber’s upper arm. It was a well-chosen place: ample blood, little danger, a lesson.
The sound then was of steel abandoning argument and finding stone; Faber’s rapier clanged upon the flags of the bridge and lay there like a truth spoken too late. The three hirelings, who had crept those small dishonest paces which the world teaches such men and sometimes unteaches with difficulty, stopped, each with one foot in the air as if a carter had checked their cart at a rut.
Faber stood, the hat by his foot like a fallen claim, and looked down at the red soaking into good cloth. He inclined his head, not displeased. “Your name is not thin,” he said. “Tell your father a man of the road kept a word with his son. The toll is paid.”
“The road owes me no toll,” Iso said, and already his fingers were busy with a kerchief at Faber’s arm - clean, brisk binding, as a soldier binds another on a march - tight enough to keep a man to his oath of standing, not so tight as to make him faint. “Keep your wits out of King’s bridges. They own themselves.”
The Wanderer rose then, having watched the whole with an eye as patient as moss on stone. He had marked every step and measure, but his face held only the mildness of a man who has seen ploughs in fields and knives in kitchens and knows what each is for. He stooped and set the rapier on the coping that it might not lie in water. The wagtail, released from witness, flew to the next stone and performed its ministry among gnats. The river, entirely uninstructed by men, continued.
Evening at last shook out its blue cloth across the world. The west in its last breath showed copper beneath a film of pewter; the north lay with a thin steel gleam upon it. One bell in the village across the water tried three notes in a courteous way and stopped, as if to say, “Enough; we all know what time it is.” The hedges took shape nearer to themselves, losing colours to keep lines. Breath showed. The smell of peat-smoke lifted sweetly from somewhere where a woman was careful with her fire and keeping an eye on bread.
Iso drew his cloak, and laughter came to him again - smaller now, private, edged with wonder and with the humility of good work well finished. He glanced to the Wanderer then as a son looks past a field for a father’s nod.
“You kept the word as you spoke it,” the Wanderer said, with that grave justice that accepts no fee. “It will do.”
Iso felt the thin smart along his forearm where Faber’s first play had scored him - no more than the line a fast quill leaves when the hand slips in writing a name too proudly - and smiled at the blood that had dried in a small map. “He touched me,” he admitted.
“Then you will wear a longer sleeve,” said the Wanderer. “The north breath grows thoughtful.”
They crossed the bridge. The arches, built squat and kindly by men who had seen many winters, hummed a little in the gathering cold the way well-set stones will. Beyond, the road went up and down in small civilities; and beyond that, lights were kindled where the village had drawn its shutters half and left them so for friendly gossip with the night. The inn that had been promised by a lintel and an old oak sheaf proved itself by warmth. The sign was nothing to speak of - paint gone, weather in the wood - but the door breathed like a beast pleased to see its keepers.
Inside, the fire went the length of the hearth, deep and steady, not flaming for vanity nor sulking for spite. On pegs hung iron things with stories: a spit that had turned at weddings; a pair of tongs with one bent lip from the day the farrier had borrowed them; a chain with a good link added by a careful hand. The room smelled of malt and porridge and the faint clean of sand on a scrubbed floor. A dog lay under a bench with a paw over its nose, hoping for no disturbance and getting none. The innkeeper, a woman with hands like roots and eyes like beech-bark in sunlight, set bowls and bread before them and looked at the line upon Iso’s arm as one looks at weather: noting it, altering nothing for it, prepared for its recurrence.
“Winter’s a mile off,” she said, refolding a cloth with the exactitude of a sailmaker. “If you go east tomorrow, the holms’ll hold you till noon. After that, they’ll have you.”
“We will be early,” Iso said quickly.
“We will be patient,” said the Wanderer, with the same word, properly tired, served hot once more.
They ate, and the spoon in the bowl made a sound like small bells in a neighboring parish. The bread tore with a faithful crumb. Men in from fields spoke of the straightness of furrows and the miserly ways of a new reeve; an old man at the corner told the room that there would be white upon the grass before cockcrow, not because of clouds - there were none worth speaking of - but because he had watched sheep when he was twelve and they had a set to them this evening. In all this there was no drama, only the kept rituals by which a people accept great weathers without complaint.
Iso watched the Wanderer in that gentle half-furtive way of the young who are discovering that the world contains calm older than their own impatience. He found in him nothing of the peacock and nothing of stone; only that well-temperedness which runs through a man like a spine and will not be drawn nor pushed. The desire in Iso that had burned like pitch under a siege cooled to a steadier fire, fit for long work.
“You found it…” he began, then broke off, abashed by the child in his own voice.
“Ordinary,” the Wanderer said, not unkindly. “The world is full of bridges, of men who set tolls upon them, of other men who refuse, and of evenings that ask the same of both: to go home with their blood inside them.”
Iso sat with this a little, like a man warming his hands on a thought, and the bone in him recognized heat for use. He remembered then the moment of the bind - the rapier’s pressure under his strong, the tremor through quillons to wrist - the measured step to steal the line. He saw again the nickel-bright nick above Faber’s ear, the honest red on the knuckles, the final trusting of his point to the right place in flesh that would not die of it. He felt a quiet pride that was mostly gratitude toward some old swordmaster in a yard that smelled of dust, who had put a stick upon his wrists and rapped them until falseness had gone out.
Outside, the stars came with the common sense of country stars - no constellation wholly right until the eye made it so. The east window took a white breath from the night and held it a little; frost began to think along the frame. The last geese went over low, late fellows with poor reckonings, honking as if uncertain whether to apologize. In the lane a cart creaked toward a shed, and the creak itself sounded hopeful of grease.
When the house had set its lids and learned the breathing of sleep, they climbed the narrow stair. The wood had known other boots and told no tales; the bannister had the polish of generations and the slight give of wood that admits time but declines to be lessened by it. In the small chamber, the coarse linen smelled of soap and sun. Iso stood a moment with his hand on the latch, not from doubt but to keep a thing present by delaying it.
“You will have me with you awhile,” he said low, as if the sentence might break if set down hard.
“You will be with me,” said the Wanderer. “Keep your sleeve long for a week and your mouth shorter. The first for the cold, the second for men.”
Iso laughed without sound, and his teeth showed white in the shadow. He lay down and slept as young men sleep after bread, blood, and praise: with the whole body’s assent. If he dreamed, it was of very small things - the feel of a hilt in a glove, a wagging wagtail’s bobbing paces, the weight of a kerchief snug upon a stranger’s arm, the sound of a rapier lying down on stone as a boast lies down when it has done. Beyond the window, winter stood outside like a courteous caller who has sent in his card and waits, cap in hand, sure of his welcome and in no hurry.
The Wanderer watched the beam for a while, where old iron made shadows like runes left half-read. The house eased around him, timbers settling their case; the river below the bridge put its shoulder to its labor and kept it. He thought of bridges, and of tolls, and of young men with bright names and honest wrists; and of the small rules of edge and step by which bodies keep themselves and in so doing sometimes keep a little of the world. He slept at last with the ease of fields after rain, and the night went on, writing its long, narrow lines of frost along hedgetop and thatch until dawn would come and read them. At the second watch he woke as he typically did, waking Iso and so on they went. On they went, borne away by bridges over rivers and the learning of the young from those before them. He had once again decided he was homeward bound. It was a long time coming.
Chapter 5: Unbidden
From “The Canticle of the Turning Road”
He went up where stone remembers fire
and wind keeps counsel with itself.
He did not bid the peak to kneel;
he set his foot where steps still held,
and the height conceived to be then height.
 - from a collected fragment
If a beam will not lie, do not scold the beam;
plane the proud grain, dress the mortice,
and let weight and patience make their treaty.
 - Master Osric’s Field-Book of Bridges and Fords, folio XXVII
Morning thinned along the foothills and kept thinning as they climbed, until light had the taste of old snow. The uplands laid themselves out with no concern for eyes that wanted show; they offered ground, angles, distances, the clean arithmetic of ascent. Behind them the low country withdrew into its own business - dykes and hedges, smoke from damp wood, lanes with puddles where crows argued. Ahead, the mountains began as a habit rather than a wall. Grass changed. Stones gathered themselves. The air forgot perfume and remembered salt, iron, peat.
Wanderer set the pace that such ground respects. He stepped where the slope showed memory of hands - flagstones sunk to their shins in turf, a cut that once let water pass without stealing the road, a short wall that now held more wind than sheep. He did not name these things; he used them as a craftsman uses the tool he has sharpened a hundred times. When a stone wobbled, he steadied it with the toe and moved on. When frost had taught a step to lift proud, he pressed it back, not with force but with the weight that suits such work. The staff in his right hand said what staffs say: that the earth is there, and so is the hand.
Iso followed. He was not unused to hills, but these required a listening he had not been taught in courts and courtyards. His breath found a rule and kept to it. He wore his cloak high and his helm slung, and he learned the trick of quiet not as a feat but as a habit - placing his foot, gathering himself, releasing what was not needed for the next yard. At intervals his hand would lift toward the sword at his side as if to check a companion’s presence, and then rest again. He had the look of a man who is careful with the day for fear the night will spend it too quickly.
Iso had slept poorly for weeks, and it showed in small economies - the way he ate, taking only what would answer the next hour; the way he watched the weather, not for signs of majesty but for the plain question of whether the world would keep dry. He spoke little. When he did, it was to point a line in the land, the easy ford in a rill, the tuft that meant bog, the brief proof that sheep had passed here and men had not passed far.
Wanderer sometimes answered and sometimes did not. Where the path narrowed to a ledge above a stone field, he put his hand on Iso’s shoulder for a moment to direct him to a notch that would take the boot and return it whole. Where the path widened, he let the young man walk at his own measure and kept beside him without comment. Here and there he stooped to lift a length of old broken fence-rail and lay it to make a step, or to set a thin wedge of apple-wood in a doorframe of air - the place where wind came through a scatter of boulders with a slow complaint that could be taught civility.
They passed a rowan that grew half out of rock. Its roots followed seams no eye could see. Someone had tied a red thread to a low branch long ago; sun and weather had bleached it to the color of early hay. Iso touched it with his knuckle without pausing. He had been taught not to laugh at things that outlasted laughter.
By noon the land had little to say except height. Water spoke in rills. Larks rose and fell. Basalt showed glass in its broken faces. A sheep bell answered itself two slopes away and then forgot to. The world kept narrow counsel.
“What did he say, the last day he stood on the wall?” Wanderer asked when the climb leveled for a dozen strides.
Iso did not answer at once. His face altered as men’s faces do when they go into rooms within themselves, opening doors with care. “My father?” he said. “Very little. He gave men distances and told them not to try to out-argue stone.” After a while he added, “He put three boys with spears where a sag was, lads who had gone out in their white shirts the week before. He told them that if they were afraid they must count - ‘Left foot, right foot, breathe’ - until they had finished being afraid. He told them not to mind the sound of banners when they cracked; it was only cloth and wind quarrelling.”
“Good counsel,” Wanderer said.
Iso gave a faint, surprised breath that might have been a laugh if it had remembered how. “He was better at standing than speaking,” he said. “He always looked as if the ground had chosen him and not the other way around. We” - he hesitated, corrected himself - “the rest of us learned that standing is not a trick; it is a way of waiting.”
They climbed again. A scatter of scree gave underfoot and then agreed to hold. A cut bank showed layers - brown soil, grey rubble, a line of ash from a fire no one living had seen. They crossed it by stepping in the places where the old road had been tamped firm by things with hooves. A cloud moved and showed how large the sky could be when a man had nowhere to hide in it.
The cabin sat where the land offered a perch that made sense: a shelf under a spit of rock, two thorn bushes to break the weather, a low stone wall that gathered a yard where goats might consider their options. No one had built it to impress anyone not in need of shelter. The turf of the roof had been cut square and laid close. The door hung on leather, pegs true. The lintel knew its work and did not complain.
Inside the peat fire had the gift of not asking to be admired. A kettle talked to itself. Thyme hung, turning slowly. A bench along the far wall held a woman with a braid coiled in her lap and a needle caught halfway through a net’s torn diamond. Her hands were brown with use and clean. Her eyes had the color that evenings keep when the day relents.
“You stepped right on the causeway,” she said. “Most men scuff it near the top and then scold the hill when it answers.”
Iso set his helm on the shelf. Wanderer eased the door and found the hinge’s temper with two fingers, then left it alone because it was better than it looked.
“Bread is yesterday’s,” the woman said, “so it will tell you what it is. I am Branwyn of the small ridges. If you sit, the bench will not give you its mind unless you deserve it. If you hang your cloak where it can drip straight, the floor will thank you in its way.”
They did as she said. Broth waited its own time. When it came, it did not pretend to be more than it was; goat, onion, thyme, fat skimmed by an attentive spoon. Iso ate with the appetite of a man who wishes to be courteous to his grief - taking enough to support it without making it lord of the table.
Branwyn’s manner made room for a thing to be said. She saw that room had been lacking and put it back. “The mountain sends travelers who need a small repair,” she said. “Sometimes it is the shoe. Sometimes the door. Most often it is the word they use to name their trouble.” She stitched two knots and bit the thread. “Try yours.”
Iso looked to Wanderer and then away, as if asking leave from both men and air. “My father has taken to his bed,” he said. “Isonondros Vex. When Redpeak went dark once, he stood and light returned as far as a wall can manage that work. He is not old by any reasonable count, but his breath is thin, and the physicians have measures that end too soon. I came up because - ” He slowed, fought his way across the shallow, reachable words to reach the ones that cost. “Because I wanted the world to hear me sooner.”
Branwyn did not praise his honesty or pity him. She set her palm on the table’s edge to steady the grain, then withdrew it, and the table stayed steady. “He stood on the wall,” she said. “I was not there. But I met men who came later and did not have to add adjectives to his name. That is rare in a garrison.”
Iso’s mouth moved, not quite a smile. “He had a way of making the ground around him forget untidy thoughts,” he said. “He told me once that the city would not thank him, but the stones would. He liked that better.”
“Then the stones are faithful now,” she said. “They keep him in their way.”
Silence put its hands on the room and held it without squeezing. Outside, wind learned the house’s eaves again and chose not to complain. Wanderer stood and, with a carpenter’s caution, found the mortice where the lintel lay a shade proud from a winter’s work; he slid a thin wedge home. Air went another way after that.
Wanderer turned the kettle’s hook one notch so the simmer would not quarrel with the flame. “Hooks,” he said. “I carry a few.”
“In the north cloister there was a bell that would not ring for men’s hands,” he began. “They pulled and pulled; it sulked. An old lay-brother opened the louvre above it and closed a slit two walls away. After that, when wind crossed the court the right way, the bell spoke on a single breath and needed no rope at all. No miracle - only air with a corridor to walk.”
“In a shrine the maps forgot, the floor held a ledger stone that never warmed in summer. A mason lifted it for a repair and found a bowl of water in a pocket beneath, set there by the first builder. The stone stayed cool because it had a quiet neighbor. They put the bowl back and sealed it. The dead man lay easier. So did the living.”
“In the Hollow of Glass a stair stood through an earth-shiver that laid better houses low. When they pulled the stair after, there was a space beneath each tread as wide as a little finger. The master who had cut it never filled a joint to its throat. He left room for the wood to keep its bargains.”
“On the salt road there is a mile-post that moves three grains of sand each year. Carters swear at it and then learn to count the change. The road is more honest than the stone: it admits that land is not still. Those who insist on old numbers find their wagons in the marsh.”
“In a dry year a manor well failed. They scoured the shaft, blessed the bucket, scolded the sky. An old woman lifted the bucket out and left the throat open a night. In the morning the water stood a hand’s breadth higher. The well had not failed; the habit had.”
“South of Brennen Tor a shepherd watched a bright star near the solstice that always led him home at lambing. One winter it went missing for four nights. He did not curse heaven. He walked by the darker stars and found his folds just the same. When the bright returned, it was no longer necessary.”
“A wheelwright trued a cart for a lord who would not be shaken. He tightened spokes until the wheel sang and still it wandered. He sat down, undid three, and the wheel settled. Some things go straight by being allowed a little way about them.”
“In a city whose name the river ate, an archive kept a book of wars. At the center there was a page left blank by a scribe who died at his desk. It was the dirtiest leaf in the volume, for every reader turned it and held his breath there before going on. The blank did the holding.”
“At Red Gate a hinge learned to open only when a man pushed and another pulled. Alone, each racked the pin and tore the strap. Together, the weight went where it should. They carved no motto. The gate taught the lesson without letters.”
“In a bad swarm-year, a keeper set a board in his hive slightly ajar. The bees re-learned the air and stayed. He did no dance and sang no charm.”
Wanderer fell quiet. “These are not cures,” he said. “They are joinery. Use them, or leave them, but do not polish them for show.”
Iso listened with the concentration that soldiers give to simple instructions on a bad day. Something eased in his face - not hope, exactly; a kind of permission. He sat a little more square on the bench and rested both feet. His right hand, which had held the bowl with the grip of a man bracing a gate in wind, loosened on the rim.
When the bowls were empty, Wanderer washed them and set them to drain. He shook three pegs from a length of oak he carried wrapped in cloth and shaved them to fit a row along the door, because a house that offers welcome deserves small gifts. Branwyn watched the way he set them - a twist, a press, a short heel of palm - and nodded. “Some men carry trouble until it teaches them its name,” she said. “Some carry answers and do not say so.”
Iso looked between them. “I would trade all the answers I am owed,” he said low, “for one breath that is not counted.” He did not weep. He had not wept in years and did not remember how to in a room not his own. But his throat learned again the shape of the pause that comes before the first tear.
“Then do not trade,” Branwyn said. “Hold both things. Men do, when they have to.”
Afternoon stooped into evening. The mountains kept their size; they did not play with light to flatter themselves. Branwyn put the net aside and, as the day cooled, drew a blanket about her shoulders in a way that suggested she had done so every evening for thirty years and would keep doing so whether kings rose or fell. Wanderer sat with his back near the hinge, not to block the draft but to learn it in his shoulders and answer it with the set of his body.
In that quiet, Iso spoke more fully of Isonondros. He told of the year a fever took the south quarter and the General walked the lanes before dawn when the heat was smallest, speaking with the men who scrubbed the wells and with the women who had lost the knack of sleep. He told how the man had a way with animals - how the skittish bay mare at the north gate would stand if Isonondros set a hand to her neck and did not ask her to be braver than she could be. He spoke of the time his entourage was slain and to protect his wife he fought off twenty one highwaymen who dared to ambush him. He told how his father, who could find his way in fog on the west road by counting seven drains and a turn, who knew the seam in the parapet that would take a tent-pole and hold a boy’s blanket when the wind came down from the ridge - how that man, in the last month, had taken to forgetting the location of his own chair and, once, his own name.
Branwyn let the words land where they would. “He had been the sort of man who leaves a place in better order than he found it, and did so without noise,” she said. “Such men are repaid late.”
“By whom?” Iso asked.
“By the things they set right,” she said. “Which is to say, by all of us, in small currency,  it is not ill to have stories about oneself told to strangers.”
The kettle sighed and fell to more modest talk. Outside, a kestrel pressed itself into the last pale of sky and then went to roost. Goats in the pen breathed the pens’ slow breath. Night laid the room into fewer shapes and allowed each to keep its name.
Sleep found Iso in pieces and then all at once. His mouth softened. Once his fingers lifted, as if finding a shield, and then they settled. Branwyn closed her eyes without fuss. Wanderer took the second watch not because fear asked him to but because habit had long since learned the hours.
He went outside at the hinge of night and morning. The stars had the cold respect that high air teaches them. The ridge wore a seam of faint light like a thought about to be spoken. Far down in the valley a bell traveled one step along stone and then vanished back into the life where bells belong. Wanderer set his palm to the west corner where the cabin makes its bargain with wind and frost and rock, and felt in that touch the old treaty being sworn again: weight given, weight taken, nothing wasted. He drew breath as mountains draw breath - in measure, without hurry. He did not put words to it.
Grey came, and with it the thin patience that grey carries. Branwyn gave them a heel of bread that would serve in a pinch, a twist of salt, and a square of linen with a single red stitch in one corner. “For remembering that knots made by living hands can be untied,” she said. To Iso she added a look that put a plank beneath him. “Say your psalm.”
He said it without ceremony:
Leave room in the house for breath you did not plan.
Plane nothing that asks to bear its proud grain.
Hold with the weight you have; do not borrow more.
They stepped into the morning. The path down was the same path up, seen from the other side of things, which is different enough. Ledges pretended to be broader when a man faced home, and narrowings announced themselves earlier. The light did not warm much; it was clear about its limitations. Iso did not speak for a while. When he did, his voice carried less of the court and more of the ridge. “I wanted to ask the Maker to be ashamed,” he said, “and I still do. But I think shame is a poor carpenter.”
“Keep better tools,” Wanderer said.
“Branwyn’s kind,” Iso said. “Pegs. Wedges. Names set true. If I must wait, I will not spend the waiting as a coward does.”


They walked. A hawk held itself above a long slope, making a choice patiently and then letting the choice go. The rowan with the faded thread watched them pass. A rill crossed the path and asked for nothing. The day went about its business.
Far away at home - Redpeak with its roofs washed thin by old weather, lintels that have learned to keep the seasons without quarrel, banners folded and left to rest - the room kept to its practice. A woman sat near a bed. She had the habit of adjusting what does not need adjusting: a curtain pulled back the width of two fingers so air would mind its way; a shawl set square over a chair’s back so the chair would remember the back it had served; a rosary moved one bead and then another, counting two breaths at once. The house bore weight in the places made for weight; its beam, set years ago by a carpenter who would have been ashamed to cheat the mortice, did not complain. It kept its covenant with the roof; the roof kept its covenant with the weather.
The sleeper’s face turned from the wall. There was no omen in it, no flourish. The breath that followed was longer by a small measure - the length of a finger laid on a table - and then another breath came after it without coaxing. The creak that answered from the sound wood was not a sign; it was the ordinary speech of a house that continues. The woman’s sigh was the sort with no audience: the air changing shape in a quiet room. General Isonondros Vex, High General of Redpeak, Chancellor of the Seven Peaks, Bulwark, and Knight of Quartz, stood up, wavered, and walked to his table. It was an old piece, made of ash wood, resolute, stacked with various unsigned papers and legislation that could wait for any amount of time. He found with his old hands a mug filled with water, he took a sip.
Wanderer awoke on the second watch and looked to Iso, he decided again, with the next dawn and a brief break in the cold weather, that it was time to go home.
He went on, borne away by winter winds and by a small sip of water taken very far away. There were things going on in the wide world that were indeed grander or more splendid, but ahead there were still mountains that needed to be climbed and still storms to be weathered.

It had been a good door.

Before it was a door it had been a tree on a wind-scraped hill, an oak that drank slow years through its roots and answered every winter with a new ring of stubborn growth. Storms had combed its crown; crows had judged its branches; once, lightning had struck the far side of its trunk and left a scar that healed coarse and dark. When at last men felled it with wedges and songs, the tree did not fall gladly, but it fell well. Its heart was cut into planks, its sap bled and dried, and its grain took the long patient polish of human touch.

Now the oak stood in a frame of whitewashed wall, banded with iron and stained a deep, sober brown. Its grain ran in close, dark lines, with knots like old eyes where branches had once reached for sun. Half a handspan above the threshold the wood bowed inward in a shallow warp, as though remembering some hillside lean from its youth. At the lower hinge there was the faintest twist, invisible unless a late ray of light from the sole small window struck just so. Hairline cracks wandered beneath the varnish like thin, forgotten creeks. There was a pale, smooth patch at latch-height, worn by years of thumbs and knuckles.

Tensa laid her palm flat against that door and read it as a scholar reads script.

Her fingers moved slowly over the surface, feeling each ridge of grain and slight hollow, each place where the wood had yielded more or less to time. Her eyes traced the arc of the warp, the hair’s breadth of separation between jamb and stile, the almost imperceptible lift where hinge kissed frame. Behind her eyes, another door came into being: not this visible one, but a clean model of it, stripped of paint and plaster, set bare in an imagined frame with every peg and nail and joint in its true place.

She saw the lower hinge, set a touch too deep when the house was young, biting hard into its mortice. She saw how last winter’s rains had swelled the jamb and then left it shrunken, loosening the screws. She saw the grain crossing that hinge in a weak line, a boundary already half-drawn by chance and age.

Door, frame, latch, hinge: all of it fixed in her thought, held steady as a stone under hand.

Survey.

Outside, in the lane, two men waited.

The taller of the pair stood close to the door, his shoulder almost brushing the lintel. He was wrapped in a cloak of dark grey, the color of rain-clouds over slate. His hair, long and black, fell from his hood in straight lines that glinted faintly where the light caught. At his hip a rapier hung, its sheath plain but well-kept; the hilt that showed above it was bound in dark leather, worn smooth at the edges. A dagger rode crosswise at the small of his back; his cloak fell so that his hands hung free.

His eyes, when he half-turned his head to watch the lane, were pale—not the soft blue of summer sky, but the color of winter light on a frozen stream. There was no hurry in them, no anger. Only the patient accounting of a man who had followed many trails to their ends.

The other man was shorter and wider, with a neck like a tree-stump and forearms knotted from years of lifting what others could not. His own cloak was the same storm-grey, but it sat ill on his shoulders, as if he had put it on after a life in rougher gear. Both his hands were on the haft of a halberd: axe-blade, hook, and spear point all fused in one long reach of ash wood and iron.

He shifted his weight from foot to foot, the halberd’s butt ringing softly against the stones. In him the stillness was not patient but strained, like a bow too long drawn.

They spoke quietly once, words too muffled to pass the oak. It did not matter. Tensa felt them there as surely as she felt the door under her hand. The weight of armed men sat on the air in its own way, bending the world’s attention around them.

She breathed in through her nose, slow and deep. Her lungs ached from running; her ribs stung where she had taken a glancing blow from a jut of stone in some alley. Her heart thudded against her shirt. She let it all pass and went deeper.

Beneath the throb of blood and the bright rim of fear, below the quick animal wish to flee and the thin, stubborn streak in her that said no even now, there was another place inside her.

She had never given it a true name. The older mar-folk she had met had called it many things: the Black Thought, the Wrong Sea, the Under. The broken priests called it blasphemy. Children in her home village whispered about it as a monster that lived in mar-bones and ate light.

To Tensa it was simply the place she did not look at until she must: a hollow, vast and depthless, where nothing was arranged and everything yearned to fall apart.

When she turned her inner sight that way, she felt it stir.

Consume the earth, it whispered without voice.
Rot the beams. Rust the hinges. All things crave the dust.

Return them so.

Set me free.

The not-voice was not a mind. It had no plan. It was hunger noticing a crack in the jar that held it. It rose, pressing against her, wanting to flood through her hands and eyes and breath into every ordered thing in reach.

She had learned, over years of small, frightened practice, to stand on its shore without stepping in. She had learned to dip a cup and no more. But it always seemed wider when she came back.

She took the barest sip.

Cold rushed up her nerves, across her skin, through her bones, a prickling like frost-cold water poured too quickly down a parched throat. Her fingers cramped briefly on the wood. Somewhere, faintly, she heard her own teeth grind.

Seed.

She did not push at the door as a man pushes, from outside. She slipped that thread of Wrong into the model she held, laid it along the lines she had mapped: from the lower hinge, up through the weak grain by the latch, across the warping curve to the top rail. She gave it a direction: bend here, loosen there, remember your age.

In the oak, something old woke.

The plank under her hand sighed, a sound too soft for ears, felt in the heel of her palm. Fibers that had settled into each other decades ago remembered being separate. The iron screws in the hinge pulled a fraction in their holes, as if some old strain finally got its way.

Outside, the tall man’s fingers tightened on the latch. He felt the metal cool and flex under his hand in a way no honest latch ever did.

“She’s here,” he said, his voice low. “Work ready.”

The halberd-man snorted, breath rattling.

“I can taste her,” he growled. “Like a coin under the tongue.”

Cascade.

Tensa let the thread fatten, let it run along the line she had drawn until it was a small, controlled rush. She stopped thinking of the door as one solid piece and saw instead the countless arrangements that made it: fibers bound in grain, pins biting wood, latch against plate, the hidden straightness of the jamb.

She loosened the straightness.

The top rail bowed inward a finger-width. The jamb twisted, a thin twisting that stressed everything at once. The latch nose bit deeper into the strike plate and stuck there like a trapped tooth. Paint cracked in hair-thin patterns no human eye would have noted if they were not already looking for ruin.

The door sagged.

Outside, the tall man leaned his shoulder into it at that moment and felt it give—but not in the way a sound door gives before it bursts. It gave like wet leather twisted in two directions at once.

He stepped back at once, pale eyes narrowing.

“Not that way,” he said. “She’s warped it.”

Quench.

The thread in Tensa’s hands wanted to become a rope. The Wrong inside her, tasting movement, pressed harder. It tried to go out into the lintel, into the stone of the threshold, into the fine, invisible orders in the air itself.

She turned her thought from the door to the little wax tablets that hung at her belt.

They were scored with neat grids, fine lines she had carved in an inn’s back room with a borrowed knife: rows and columns intersecting at right angles, each square almost like the last. To most, they were wax. To her they were little gardens of order, made to be ruined.

She did not have to touch them.

She pictured the first tablet whole, lines clean, and then she threw the excess Wrong like water into a parched furrow.

The wax shuddered on its cord. Lines that had been rigid blurred into waves and then into nothing. The tablet slumped, losing its sharp corners, sagging into an uneven lump as if a strong sun had fallen on it in an instant. One side split; a thin sliver sheared off and dropped to the floor with a faint sticky sound.

The surge in her limbs ebbed.

A glass cup on the shelf beside the hearth cracked from lip to base with a high, brittle ping and fell into four perfect pieces. The flame in the corner lamp stretched thin and green, then squashed low and blue before stumbling back to yellow, leaving a smell of scorched oil. A spider that had spun its web in the rafters dropped in a helpless tangle, legs curling.

Little things always paid when sinks were light.

Tensa’s shoulders trembled once, hard. Her hand slid from the door.

The oak stood now jammed crooked in its frame, hinge and jamb both out of true. No shoulder-smash would burst it in a heartbeat. It would take work, and precise blows, and time.

Time was all she ever bought.

She turned away from the door.

The cottage’s back wall was a pieced-together face of fieldstone and old mortar, the work of some long-dead hand that had known more of haste than fine craft. Stones of every size crouched there: squat blocks with lichen, long slats with chipped corners, round river-rocks that had no right being in a wall at all. The mortar between them bulged and shrank, pale in some places, dark and damp in others.

Survey.

Her gaze strode over the wall: the broad stone that bore too much weight on two thin neighbors; the long one set on an angle that made its load pull sideways; the hairline gap where mortar had never truly gripped and only habit held stone to stone. She watched the way the little shelf above the hearth sat not quite level, how its pins hummed with the door’s recent groan.

Under her fingers, the ground felt the wall’s story.

Outside, the halberd’s butt thumped once against the door.

The halberd-man laughed without joy.

“Break it,” he snarled. “Grey or no grey, I’m not standing here while she works her witchery.”

The tall man shook his head once.

“Not like a barn-door,” he said. “You heard it warp. Take the lintel at the sides. I’ll count you.”

Tensa had no more breath to spare for their voices. She sank again into the Under, drew a broader draught. It burned as it came, the way strong spirits burn when thrown into an empty stomach.

Seed.

She laid that heat into three seams at speed: low left, where a round stone sat badly on two points; mid-right, where a long stone bridged too far; high center, where the load from the roof timber walked through a thin skin of mortar and then into poor rock.

The mortar remembered water and lime and sand. It remembered being stirred in a trough, poured and pressed, then drying slow. She reached for that memory and unmade it.

Fine cracks propagated along the seams, running like ink up paper. They sought one another, joined, forked again, a web of failure grown in a breath.

Outside, the tall man’s count reached three. The halberd-man drove his iron-bound shoulder into the door frame.

Wood groaned. A bit of plaster snowed down in the front room. The oak moved, but in moving it carried the strain to the wall behind it, and the already loosened stones took it.

Cascade.

The top half of the wall sagged. A long stone in the middle, which had sat grudgingly level for years, decided it would sit no more. It slid forward like a man stepping out of a line of spears.

The stones above it rode it down.

They did not explode; they slumped, tier upon tier, spilling outward in a rough, dusty tumble. The little window clapped its shutters and spat them into the yard along with a few chunks of plaster and a flurry of old cobwebs.

For a heartbeat the sound was like surf beating inland.

Quench.

The lead-shot tray at her belt lurked in her thought like a tightened snare.

She saw it in her inner eye: shallow wood, partitioned into a pattern of fine hexes; each hollow cradling a small, dense sphere of smoothed lead. Lines, edges, alignments: all the sort of thing the Wrong loved to chew.

She turned the rushing backwash toward it.

The tray did not leap from her side; it did not fly. It simply failed.

One moment the shot lay in perfect nested rows. The next, the wood along the grain remembered that it had never truly wished to be a tray. It cracked in three places, each splinter slicing through whole hex-fields. The little lead spheres, freed from their precise pattern, rolled, collided, clattered. The net that had held the tray slipped from the jerk and spilled everything in a heavy rush at her heel.

One ball snapped sideways with force enough to dent the hearth-stone. Another bounced with impossible grace and drove itself into the packed earth wall near the door-tip like a bullet, humming faintly.

On the mantel, a ceramic bowl powdered silently into dust. The air in the cottage grew suddenly still, as if it had exhaled too hard and was now catching breath.

Tensa ignored it all. The wall had given. The gap yawned.

She dove through, arms tight to her sides, stones scraping her shoulders and hips. Dust scoured her lungs. Cold light stabbed her eyes.

She hit the yard beyond in a roll, gravel and broken mortar biting palms and knees, then came up and ran before the rubble had finished settling.

Behind her, in the gloom of the cottage, the tall man cursed softly at the sudden burst of handling-noise and unseen ruin. He smelt scorched oil and powdered ceramic. He saw a slant of daylight knifing through the smoke.

“Back,” he snapped.

He dragged the halberd-man away from the door and lunged through the front room. They emerged at the broken back wall a heartbeat later, grey cloaks streaked with dust.

For a moment they had to halt, not from fear but from sense. The air still rang with the after-taste of unseaming: a metallic tang on the tongue, a faint pressure behind the eyes. Loose straw on the floor quivered though there was no wind. A hanging ladle swung once, without cause, and then hung still.

“Spill,” the tall man muttered. “She’s working fast.”

“Then faster we go,” the halberd-man growled, and vaulted the fallen stones.

Tensa had already gained the length of the narrow yard. She flashed past a lean-to where nettles grew in a mean strip, crashed through a sagging gate that surrendered more from rot than from any craft of hers, and found herself in a run of alleys.

The city rose around her: low houses of plaster and stone, their backs turned to these service ways; lines of wash sagging between upper windows; barrels and cart wheels; puddles with rainbow skins where fish-guts had been poured. The sea was close. She could smell tar and old salt in every breath.

Her legs burned like brands. The long drink she had just taken from the Wrong left her light-headed, every edge too sharp. She ran anyway.

Here, the world narrowed to the small survivals.

A puddle stood across the alley, broad and still, from last night’s rain. As she splashed into it, she tasted the cool on her tongue, the slight thickness from the filth, the way its surface skin held.

Survey-seed-cascade, no quench—on purpose.

It was a foolish extravagance it was; it was what she had.

In the half-step as she passed, she breathed a hair of entropy into it, traced with her mind the pattern of surface tension, broke it wrongly.

Mist leapt up.

Not simple splash, but a sudden blossom of fine droplets that rose higher than any footfall should throw them, spreading in a low cloud that filled the narrow space from wall to wall. Light from some high side-door lamp struck them and scattered, turning the alley into a bright, milky confusion.

Backwash nipped the laces of her boots, and one snapped. Her left shoe slithered loose.

She did not slow to tie it. The boot flapped and threatened her balance, but she rode it.

Behind her, the tall man hit the mist.

His eyes, trained though they were to pick shapes from gloom, found only a thrashing whiteness. For three strides he ran blind. The halberd-man blundered into his shoulder, swore, righted, nearly went to ground. By the time the vapour thinned and settled back into the puddle as a sudden widening of its dark, Tensa had gained another turn of the alley.

She tore around a corner and nearly collided with a handcart, its wheel propped up on a stone, its axle bare. A cluster of turned spokes and hub-wood lay beside it, arranged in careful order by some craftsman who had gone in search of a tool.

Nine spokes. One hub. Each spoke numbered in charcoal where it would fit. Each number neat, each spoke like its neighbor.

Her mind snatched the pattern in passing.

As she vaulted the cart, she threw a pinch of Wrong at the ordered wood.

She did not even look. She heard the result: a dry crack as the numbers smeared on their own, a chorus of clatters as the spokes, which had been resting precisely, rolled and fell and tangled without human touch.

Behind her, the tall man, who had intended to grab a spoke as he ran and fling it ahead as an obstacle, found instead a scatter of treacherous rolling wood underfoot. He stumbled, skidded, almost went to a knee, caught himself with his free hand on a wall so hard his palm bruised.

“Mar-rat,” the halberd-man spat again, his words snapping like his companion’s fingers on the stone.

They came on.

The alleys bent and twisted, sometimes pinched so narrow Tensa had to turn sideways, sometimes widening into small courts where old trees grew in earth-circles and children chalked patterns. Laundry slapped her face once, a shirt wet and cold.

In one such widening, a lamp sat high on a bracket, its glazed sides turned toward the lane. Tensa saw in a heartbeat the hairs of stress in its glass, the cloudiness near one corner where the glaze had pooled too thick.

She did not pause for a full working. She flicked a thought toward it—no proper survey, no seeded crack, just a sharp, wasteful stab of entropy.

The glaze crazed. The glass burst outward in a spray of pebbled shards. Flame leapt tall, flaring white, then billowed into a smoky, glaring bloom as the wind took it.

Backwash nipped at the stitching of her collar. The thread parted. Her shirt fell loose over one shoulder, dragging, but she did not care.

The flare bought her more than any tidy sink would have. The sudden light blinded the hunters’ dark-ready eyes; the raining shards hissed on the stones, forcing them to guard their faces with arms and cloak.

It was ill work. It stank of waste and want of discipline. Masters she had never had would have beaten her for it.

It kept her alive.

At last the alleys spat her out into a cramped courtyard hemmed by the backs of houses. A few stone vats squatted by one wall, holding rainwater or brined vegetables. Above them a gallery ran, timber-railed, giving to an upper door. Lines of washing sagged between this and a facing ledge, shirts and skirts and long underthings flapping slow.

Three ways: a low arch choked in shadow to the right; a half-hidden lane cluttered with broken barrels left; the open stairs straight ahead.

Height. Sight. Air.

She chose the stairs.

The tall man read the choice in the set of her shoulders.

He cut across the courtyard at a slant, long legs eating the flagstones. The halberd-man pounded after, weapon low.

Tensa took the first two steps three at once, hand on the rail. Her boot, half-unlaced from the puddle-mist, slipped. She lurched, caught herself, stumbled again.

The tall man was there.

His rapier came up like a bolt of white. It spoke in the plain tongue of killing. Point for her ribs, under the breastbone, where the heart beat closest to the skin.

She twisted. The blade traced a line of fire across her sleeve and kissed flesh lightly beneath. Her right hand, acting before thought, caught the foible of the sword between thumb and two fingers, feeling the tremble of quenched steel.

The weapon told its tale in that heartbeat: thin blade, fine temper, balanced for the thrust; the heat-marks from forging hidden beneath polish; the joint where hilt met tang. She could have unseamed that joint with a good model and a stout sink, robbed him of his line.

She had neither. She had only the Wrong, roaring up, delighted by the closeness of bright, tight steel.

Take it, it urged.
Take his hand with it. Unpick the tendons. Slip inside his wrist. See how he dances when his sinews sing wrong.

She flung the impulse sideways, into the world, because she could not bear it in herself.

Her mind struck the nearest proper pattern: the tight weave of the gallery’s laundry-line, drawn from wall to post, the shirts hung on it in even intervals.

Quench and spill at once.

The rope twitched without touch. Fibers that had been twisted together for years tightened and then sprang apart in one instant of unremembering. The line snapped. Wet cloth dropped in a flurry between them.

A shirt slapped the tall man’s blade, spoiling his measure. Another wrapped itself around his off-hand wrist like a clumsy lover. His follow-up cut went wide, shredding linen instead of flesh.

Backwash skittered along the wooden rail of the stairs. Its fine grain loosened in a sharp strip; the next time Tensa’s hand touched it, a whole splinter came away in her palm. She bit her lip to keep from crying out and used the pain to keep her feet under her.

She threw herself sideways, rolled under the ruined line, and found her way to the far arch.

The halberd-man was already veering, boots pounding.

He came down on her with all the weight and force of a falling anvil, halberd whistling.

She did the only thing she could. She dropped.

Her shoulder hit the flags. Stone bruised bone. She let herself slide, dragging her fingertips along the gritty floor as she went, marking with touch the fine bumps and pits, the old chisel-marks, the hairline fracture between two slabs.

Survey-seed-cascade, dirty and fast.

She laid a thin, sharp slice of Wrong along that fracture.

The stone did not crumble; it softened. Its cohesion wavered just as the halberd-man’s leading foot struck.

His heel, expecting firmness, found something like paste. It drove too deep. His weight, thrown forward, had nowhere sound to go. His ankle twisted with a wet pop. He fell with a bellow that shook the rafters, shoulder striking the lip of a vat hard enough to crack stone.

A ripple went through the paving.

The nearest vat shifted as the ground under it slumped. Water sloshed out in a sudden gout, washing his legs, splattering the tall man’s boots.

The backwash, starving for finer structures, ate them where it found them.

A spider’s web in the corner of the railing sagged, threads letting go of their perfect angles and dangling like rotten floss. The careful stitching in the halberd-man’s glove cuff parted in a clean ring around his wrist, the seam simply deciding it had been too much effort to hold. The air itself creaked in the ears.

It was ugly magic, done in panic, half-conceived and half-spilled. It staggered him. It did not kill him.

Tensa did not wait to see him rise.

She went through the arch, into a lane that ran uphill, the houses thinning, the smell of sea fading. The sky widened between roofs. The noise of the city fell behind.

Fields opened ahead: a patchwork of cut wheat, stubble like broken spears; fallow strips with weeds; scattered trees with bare branches scratching the air. Beyond them, low hills rolled, grey-green and brown.

She ran at them as a besieged runner throws himself at a gate he knows may not be open.

Her breath tore at her throat. Her legs felt filled with sand. Each heartbeat came with a ringing in her ears that had little to do with exertion.

Behind, boots still beat the stones. Steel rang as the tall man recovered his blade from some snag or mis-step. A roar of mingled pain and rage, the halberd-man’s, followed.

“Mar-girl!” he shouted after her, voice rough as gravel. “You can’t keep spoiling and walking away! That world will catch you! That world will eat you!”

She did not answer. The world was already eating her; she could feel it in the way her fingertips tingled, the way light seemed to tilt.

She cleared the last low stone fence and plunged into the field.

Cut stalks whipped her shins, scratching. Dry earth puffed under her boots. Crows rose cawing ahead, black storms of wings. She slid once in a rut, righted, pushed on.

The land dipped. Ahead, a shallow hollow lay where boys had rolled down slopes and sheep had sheltered from wind. Stones jutted along its rim where some old wall had melted back into ground.

She reached it and stumbled to a halt, more from the sudden emptiness in her chest than from choice.

Her kit hung light. One wax tablet left, limp and half-ruined. No more shot. No more tiles. Only a single square of clay at her belt, etched—and with the crack from earlier work feathering its corner. Strings gone to frayed threads. Cord-frame cut.

She stood in the center of the hollow, hands on knees, chest heaving, and understood with cold clarity: if she did nothing here, the men would have her. If she did everything she knew, with no sinks, she might tear the land open and drown in it.

The Wrong inside her sensed the stillness and surged, glad as fire at dry brush.

You are empty, it said, not in mockery.
They are full of order: bones that bend in named places, blood that runs in measured paths, habits of step and breath. The soil is full: layers and tightness, the weight of stone on stone. Take it all. Give me room. I can help you. I can fuel you.

Her head rang.

She raised her eyes and let them walk the hollow one last time.

Survey.

The slopes of the dip lay shallow, their angles telling the story of years of wash: water came in from the north, ran down, pooled at the center. The grass grew thinner there, roots less deep. Stones lay where the old farmer had thrown them, half-buried at odd angles. Under it all, she could feel with some deep sense the lines of harder rock, the subtle vault that held up the thin skin of soil.

She could drop it. Call the hollow down into itself, make a bowl where there had been a gentle drift. It would snare men and break legs. Make a sinkhole of sorts, something to trap them while she kept running. She could do it, she could do it without breaking everything. Tensa just had to be perfect.

She sank again to her knees and set both hands flat on the earth.

The Under rose at once, not as a cupful but as a flood. There was no coaxing; it crashed through her like a river breaking a rotten dam. Every tooth in her head ached. The scars along her shins from childhood falls burned as if newly made. Her vision went white around the edges and then narrowed to a single line: the curve of the hollow beneath her.

Seed.

She drove the surge down.

The loamy topsoil broke first: the compacted crust at the surface, the tightly laid grains of soil and leaf that had baked under suns, the little stone bridges between pebbles under the top layer. She pulled them out, turned them, made them forget in what pattern they had lain.

The skin of the bowled ground softened. Footsteps approached in the distance.

Cascade.

Weight, which had been held in mutual agreement among stones and roots, found that agreement void. It sought new rest.

The earth sagged.

The hollow became a true sinkhole, its center sinking, its edges drawing in. Stones rolled and tumbled, grinding. Grass tore with long, ripping sounds as roots pulled free of soil that no longer gripped.

Backwash rose with the movement, eager to leap, needing somewhere fine to land. She had pulled too much from the Wrong.

Quench.

There was no wax to smudge. The last tablet had already sagged and half-failed when she had bent the door. There were no trays, no cords set and pegged. Only one etched tile, no larger than her palm, hanging by its thong.

She flung the excess at it as a drowning person flings themselves at a branch.

The tile hung in her mind, its neat grid-lines like threads in a net. The backwash rushed in, crowding, too much, far too much.

The clay shuddered without moving. Its lines blurred; its angles softened; its heart cracked along an old scratch she had not even noticed making. The thong that held it frayed, thread by thread, and then parted. The tile dropped to the ground at her knee and broke into six uneven pieces.

Six pieces drank what they could. A cupful out of a flood.

The Wrong spilled over.

The air screamed without sound. Tensa felt the world around her go thin.

The grass at the sinkhole’s edge wavered, its green washing out into a leached grey that was not merely the absence of hue but an active wrongness, like bruises left on the day. The shapes of stones along the lip doubled in her sight, one set slightly offset from the other, as if time itself had slipped and the eye saw two moments at once.

The ground split in a line that was more absence than crack: a curve that cut through soil, down the slope, through the deepest part of the sag. Where it passed, blades of grass did not bend or break; they simply ceased, replaced by a strange, smooth surface like polished bone in some lights, like glass in others.

Beyond that line, for a heartbeat, there was not earth.

There was movement. Not motion that could be followed, but the impression of things shifting along axes she did not know. Hints of angles that refused to resolve, glows that were neither color nor shadow. Her eyes slid off it; when she forced them back, pain lanced behind them.

The Wrong laughed.

Not aloud. Not in words. But there was a glee in how strongly it now flowed, how the rift—the true tearing—made a channel where it could be itself.

From the slope above, boots thudded and skidded.

The halberd-man hit the new edge of the hollow with all the momentum of his charge. The ground, betraying its own compact, sloughed under his weight. His foot shot forward; he cried out, pitched headlong.

He did not fall into the pit.

He fell through the thin place.

His hand, reaching for a stone, passed the rift-line up to the elbow.

For the space of a breath, his arm ceased to belong to the world.

Tensa saw his skin pale as frost raced under it, not from surface to bone but from bone outward, strange fern-patterns of white crystallizing along his veins. His flesh sank and bulged in knots as if something with too many fingers pinched and kneaded it from beneath. The sleeve of his cloak, where it crossed the line, stretched impossibly thin, the threads arranging themselves into new, senseless patterns and then snapping.

When he wrenched his arm back, screaming, the hand that came out was the hand of someone else entirely.

The fingers bent in three places, not two, joints budding in the middle of each bone. The nails had gone grey, translucent, thickened into plates that clicked when they knocked together. Patches of skin were rough and scaled, others raw and bloodless as if turned inside-out. His thumb pointed the wrong way and yet moved when he tried to curl it.

He clutched his mangled limb to his chest, howling, voice breaking.

Sound did not travel as it should. His bellow seemed to come half a heartbeat before his mouth opened; the last syllables lagged behind, hanging in the air as thin echoes after his lips had shut. Some part of his shout stuck to the rift’s edge and was drawn along it, peeling away like a banner, leaving him suddenly hoarse, robbed of volume.

The tall man slid on his hip down the sloping turf, his hunter’s balance saving him where sheer strength had doomed his companion. He flung his weight sideways, letting himself go past the deepest sag and the thinning line by inches.

He saw the rift as he went. For a moment, the light of it reflected in his pale eyes, and shadows moved behind them that had nothing to do with the world.

He did not let his sword cross the line. Instinct, training, or some deeper caution in him tightened his arm.

Even so, the rapier, held close, felt the edge.

The blade trembled. Fine temper-lines that had been set with all the care of a master smith altered; the steel along its length greyed unevenly, one patch dull as cold pewter, another bright as fresh silver. Midway along, a finger-width of it rippled, its flat no longer entirely straight but bearing a shallow wave like heat-haze, yet remaining razor-sharp.

He caught himself at the far lip of the hollow with his free hand. The soil there tried to slither away but held, more from habit than from strength. He dragged himself up ashore from the sinking world and knelt, chest heaving.

The rift widened.

It fed not only on what she had poured into it but on the continuing collapse of the hollow, on the breaking of stone, the tearing of roots. Every small failure near it added its bit.

Lines of thinness traced outward like crackle in ice, branching from the first curve, some running only a foot and then dying, others reaching toward the slopes where grass still grew. Where they went, odd things followed.

A clump of thistles near the edge turned all its needles inward, curling like fists. The air above one branching line thickened; dust motes hung there, unmoving, forming a faint thread of bright for a span of heartbeats before dropping all at once. A crow, unlucky and late in its rising, flew across the hollow and, for three beats of its wings, left four after-images behind it, each lagging half a stroke, before they snapped together again with a sound like teeth clicking at a distance.

Tensa knelt at the pit’s center, hands still dug into the treacherous soil. Her hair streamed upward, then sideways, caught in currents no wind made. Her pupils, blown wide, turned her eyes black; the brown of them was a thin ring at the rim. The world around her was misaligned; it took effort even to understand where her body ended and the failing ground began.

The Wrong inside her rejoiced.

There, it said, immense with triumph. Now you see. All your careful cups, all your fussy tiles—why? When one good tearing brings me to the air and all things can fall as they should. They will all end, little one, and you will be the hand that begins it.

Her heart hammered in her ribs like a trapped bird. Her tongue tasted metal. There was, somewhere under the roar, a small, sane voice that whispered old lessons: Fail the model or starve the sinks, and the world answers. Rifts vary. They do not all open alike. They do not all close easily.

She could have tried to sponge it, even with nothing. She thought of lines of stones, grass braided and torn, cloth ordered and ruined. She thought of making patterns until her fingers bled and her mind broke.

But she was past the reach where thought guided the Wrong. It was guiding her.

The tall man got one knee under him and looked upon her.

There was dust on his face, blood at the corner of his mouth where he had bitten his tongue on the slide. His pale eyes were ringed in red from the strain of being too near something no human gaze was meant to hold. His sword-hand shook once, then stilled. He gauged the distance between them. He saw that he could reach her in three strides if the ground held.

“Girl,” he said, voice coming a little too slow for his lips, as if sound itself lagged. “Leave it. Step away. You’ll unmake yourself.”

She heard him as if under water.

Her head turned. Her gaze caught him.

In that instant she saw him more clearly than she ever had: the set of his shoulders, the balance of his weight on his feet, the angle of his knees from years of marching; the way his cloak fell, where it hid a knife-hilt at the back; the way his sword-hand rested on the hilt, fingers long, veins like small cords. She saw his gait in the marks his boots had left coming down the slope, slightly shorter on the left from an old injury.

Survey. Of him.

The Wrong in her uncoiled with delight at the new pattern.

Here, then, it hissed. Here is fine work. This is not stone, not wood. This is a song of flesh and habit, sung for years. Unpick it. See how the tune falters.

She did not mean to.

Her hand flicked, fingers spasming.

She thought she was pushing him back, thought she was throwing the Wrong into the ground between them to break his footing, as she had done with stones in the courtyard.

Instead she poured it along the model she had just made: into his step, his tendons, the cadence of muscle and bone.

The backwash did not go to any sink. It went to him.

He moved to rise.

His right leg, trusting a lifetime’s experience, took the weight the way it had a thousand times. The muscles along his thigh bunched, his knee bent, his ankle set.

The pattern changed under them.

The tendon behind his knee, which had been a firm cable, loosened in one place and tightened too much in another. The joint, made to bend one way, remembered in a flash that there was no true reason it should not bend another.

His leg folded sideways.

There was no satisfying crack, no simple snap. It was worse: a wet, grinding shift as things meant to slide past one another locked instead, and others meant to lock slid. His foot flew out. His knee torqued to an angle that would haunt dreams. Pain tore through him like white fire.

He did not scream. The sound caught in his throat and came out as a strangled grunt. Sweat burst from his skin.

He fell half into the hollow again, sword skidding, cloak tangling.

The halberd-man, clutching his warped hand to his breast, saw this and bared his teeth in something that was not entirely a grin.

“Hexing bastard,” he howled—in pain, in fury at the world, at her, at fate. “She’s inside you, Grey! She’s inside your bones!”

He stumbled down the slope, heedless of the rift-line now. Rage made him prodigal with his own life.

Tensa’s gaze snapped to him.

She saw his barrel chest, the way he carried his weight forward, the thick cords of muscle across his shoulders, the slight roll of flesh at his waist where years of good ale had added to strength. She saw the labor of breath in him, the hitch where his cracked ribs from the vat strike complained.

The Wrong surged again, hot and sharp.

She struck with it as a wounded animal strikes with teeth: unthinking, aiming only to hurt.

She knew from stories that living flesh pushed back; that without a healer’s clean knowledge of anatomy, unseaming the body was more danger to the worker than to the target. But now the rift gave the Wrong a path, and control had already slipped.

She poured entropy into the rhythm of his heart.

The heart is a stubborn thing. It does not lightly change the beat that has carried it from birth. But under strain, under fear, it sometimes stumbles. She caught one such half-stumble and deepened it.

For a terrifying instant his chest clenched. His next heartbeat came early and hard, the one after late and weak. The pattern of pulse in neck and wrist faltered, losing its simple cadence to an ugly, skipping beat.

He staggered, hand flying to his breast, eyes wide. Blood, deprived of steady push for a few drops’ worth of time, eddied in the wrong places.

The Wrong, dissatisfied with half-work, took more.

It ran along the tendons in his good arm, loosening some, tightening others. Fingers clenched of their own accord around the halberd-haft. He tried to open them; the new joints in his warped right hand bent and locked, the old joints in his left jammed. Muscles twitched in a grotesque dance, no longer following nerve but some other song.

He toppled into the pit, into the rift’s light.

For a moment he was outlined there, a man-shaped absence in the tearing, his features stretched by speed and misaligned time. Then the thinness embraced him.

Tensa saw—too clearly—his cheek turned to something like rough glass, through which the shadow of his jawbone could be glimpsed. She saw his eye pulled long, the pupil dilating into an oval that turned and turned and never quite pointed anywhere the world admitted. One side of his mouth melted inward, teeth showing through skin that had become as thin as paper. His chest compressed and widened in slow, nauseating pulses, ribs folding backward and forward like the slats of some obscene fan.

When the rift spat him out onto the far slope, he was still alive.

He lay half on his side, half on his back, limbs in shapes no limb should take. His breath rattled in a trachea that had grown too many rings. His good hand scrabbled at the earth, fingers leaving furrows that filled slowly, as if the soil itself were reluctant to admit his touch.

His scream came in two parts: first, a thin, high note far too long for a human lung, then, a deep, animal bellow that did not quite match the opening of his changed mouth. Some of the sound never left him at all; it writhed under his skin, making the muscles twitch with every unshed vowel.

The tall man dragged himself from the lip, leg at its ruined angle, cloak catching on stones. He moved with a grim, desperate economy, the way a soldier on a battlefield moves when there is more hurt than time. His eyes never left Tensa.

In her, the Wrong had ceased to be a thread she held. It had risen to the level of her eyes. The rift’s light burned in their depths.

She was no longer only directing. She was channel.

The world around them warped in small ways, bearing witness.

Shadows no longer fell where they should; the two men’s silhouettes dragged behind them half a heartbeat, dark smears on the earth that took time to catch up. The crows that circled, more curious now than afraid, left trails of black beads through the sky, each image of them snapping into the next like beads on a string. The sound of wind over the cut wheat came sometimes before it moved the stalks, sometimes after.

The tall man made one last attempt.

He planted his sword in the ground to brace himself, then hauled his ruined leg under him and pushed to his feet. The knee wobbled hideously but held for three heartbeats.

He limped toward her, each step a small act of war against his own body. His free hand reached out, open, palm up.

“Enough,” he said. The word came twice: once in his mouth, once in the air a half-moment later, overlapping. “Girl. Stop. You will not be the only one this takes.”

She looked at his hand.

For a breath, something like recognition flickered through the black ring of her gaze. Her lips parted. Her fingers twitched, as if to take his.

The Wrong, affronted, surged.

In her mind’s eye, his outstretched hand was not a hand but a knot of too many small orders: bones, tendons, skin, callus from sword-hilt and rein. It was intolerable.

She unmade it.

Not fully, not with craft. Brutally.

The fingers broke their agreement about where they began and ended. The little bones in them slid. Two fingers fused along half their length, leaving a forked, flipper-like thing. Another shortened, its joints collapsing inward until it was little more than a knuckle growing out of the palm. Skin along the back of the hand puckered into tight, white ridges, then relaxed into loose, drooping folds.

He fell to his knees as if she had driven a blade into his gut.

His ruined hand clutched at his equally ruined leg; that leg, its pattern already spoiled, yielded further, the knee folding in a new, obscene direction. He crumpled into the dirt in a knot of cloak and limbs, sword falling from his grip to lie along the rift’s edge.

The blade did not break. It changed.

The steel along its length sprouted fine hairline cracks that did not belong to any forge. They spread and turned, bounded into little hexes, like the ghost of one of her shot-trays imposed on metal. Light slipped into them and would not come back out clean; looking at the blade felt briefly like looking down from a high place.

At the pit’s edge, the rift pulsed.

It had been widening, feeding on every broken thing. Now, with the two men’s mangled bodies nearby and her mind no longer keeping any sort of careful tally, it licked toward them in thin tongues of thinness: little arcs of Not that curved through the air of the hollow, touching skin, cloth, steel.

Where they passed over the halberd-man’s cloak, the grey fabric turned briefly transparent, revealing a lattice of muscles and arteries beneath that were not quite where anatomy said they ought to be, before opacity returned. One arc brushed his hair; the locks bleached in a line, going stark white and brittle which then fell away, leaving a streak of scalp that shimmered faintly as if not entirely sure which way it faced.

Another curve of rift-light grazed the tall man’s face.

It did not cut him. It slid through his left eye like a shadow.

The eye went slate-grey in an instant, pupil dilating, iris losing all color. A faint, spider-fine network of lines appeared in the white, black as ink. Tears poured from it uncontrollably, not clear but shimmering, each drop holding a tiny, upside-down image of the hollow as if it were a lens. When the tears struck the earth, they did not soak in at once; they flattened, spread, and then sank with an audible swallow.

He cried out then—a short, hoarse sound that had fear in it for the first time.

That sound did not carry far. The rift stole most of it, smearing it along its length as a low, ongoing murmur, so that for a while afterward the hollow whispered with the ghost of his cry.

Tensa watched, chest heaving, hands trembling at her sides.

The Wrong filled her ears with its amusement.

Look, it purred. Look what we can do. These were hunters, grey and strong, teeth at your neck. Now their bones ask your permission to stand. The land herself opens to your hand. Why would you ever go back to bending doors and cracking tiles?

The smell in the hollow was wrong now. It was not rot, not smoke, not blood. It was the smell of a room that has been sealed for a very long time and then opened, of a chest in a deep cellar: stale, old, thin, as if the air had remembered being other than breathed and resented it.

Somewhere under the roar of the Wrong, another voice spoke, very faint but stubborn.

It was not any elder. It was her own, younger, sitting by a hearth in a small winter house, listening to stories of mar-folk who had gone too far and the holes they had left in the world.

If you go that far, that remembered Tensa had said once, earnest, as the fire popped, can you come back?

The old man telling the tale had stared into the smoke for a long time before answering.

Some do, he had said. They come back with white hair and bad dreams and hands that tremble when they touch anything too finely made. Some don’t. Some leave only a place where nothing quite grows right for a hundred years. The Wanderer alone walks then the fixing Road and returns unburned. We are all just folk.

She was folk. Not god. Not road.

Her knees buckled. The sight of the mangled men, the pit, the smearing light, the creeping lines of thinness became too much to hold at once. Her stomach lurched. She vomited into the rift-scarred earth and watched, horrified, as the half-digested food slid toward the thin place and then stopped at its edge, trembling, as if unwilling to cross.

The Wrong pressed, wanting to do more.

She turned and ran.

She did not plan it. There was no choice weighed, no pros and cons. Some untouched part of her, the marrow that still knew how to flee fire and flood, took her body in hand and flung it up the slope, away from the pit, away from the tearing.

Her first step nearly failed. The ground, still settling, shifted under her boot. Thin lines of half-born rifts tried to snag her in the ankle. She did not slow. She leaped them like a hare over snares, sometimes clearing, sometimes catching the edge.

Where she caught, small things paid: a thread in her trousers unspun along a strange diagonal; the leather of her boot heel wrinkled and warped, making each step feel like walking on a stone; the braid of her hair, already loosened by the unseaming at the lamp, untwisted further until strands flew free.

She did not look back.

Behind her, the hollow remained.

The rift did not close as some did, snapping shut like a mouth when the first shock passed. It hung, a long crescent of thin world, its edge frayed now by lack of clear direction but still very much there. It gnawed slowly at whatever fine order came near: the patterns in frost on cold mornings, the careful weave in any cloak laid too close, the habits of roots that dared the pit’s rim.

The halberd-man lay close to its light, still shuddering, breath ragged. The tall man, half-blind, half-crippled, dragged himself away by inches, sword forgotten, fingers of his mutated hand furrowing earth in sickening symmetry with the scars forming in the world.

Crows wheeled above, crying harshly. Their calls echoed strangely, some seeming to come from far under the ground, others from too high in the sky.

The field around the hollow grew quiet in a way fields should not. No cricket sang. The wind avoided the exact center, bending subtly so that grass on one side leaned this way, on the other that, no blade daring the direct crossing.

Tensa reached the crest of the next rise and, beyond it, the first scrub of the border woods.

Trees stood there, not tall yet, but old enough to know their shapes: oaks and ash and a few twisted birches, leaves shivering. Between their trunks shadows lay cooler than the open field, laced with bracken and fallen branches. Paths, deer-made or boy-made, wound dimly under the boughs.

She flung herself into them.

The forest received her as it receives all fugitives: without question, without kindness, without report. Branches slapped at her face. Roots reached up to trip. The smell of leaf-mold and damp earth rose in her nostrils, drowning the sick, thin scent of the rift for a while.

She did not know how long she ran. Long enough that her side cramped and then went numb. Long enough that the Wrong’s voice, joyous at first, began to thin with distance, like a song fading down a road.

At last her legs failed. She crashed to her knees by a fallen log, hands sinking into moss. The forest hummed around her with its own, slow orders: growth in rings, sap rising, ants in lines. The Wrong in her still reached for them, greedy, but she clenched her jaw and curled around her own arms, denying it.

She wept then, great tearing sobs she had not given herself leave for in years. No one heard but the trees.

Behind, on the border of field and wood, the hollow she had torn remained open to the sky.

All she could do was hope for time. Time for what, she did not know.

Perhaps for the rift to tire. Perhaps for the Wanderer, if He cared, to glance this way. Perhaps only so that if she died, she did not take half the county with her.

Perhaps a great many things. One day, maybe, perhaps a great many more.